1
[1]
 When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene,
Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and
anoint him. 
2
Very early when the sun had risen, on the first
day of the week, they came to the tomb. 
3
They were saying to one another, "Who will
roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?" 
4
When they looked up, they saw that the stone
had been rolled back; it was very large. 
5
On entering the tomb they saw a young man
sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were utterly
amazed. 
6
He said to them, "Do not be amazed! You
seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified. He has been raised; he is not here.
Behold the place where they laid him. 
7
But go and tell his disciples and Peter, 'He is
going before you to Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.'" 
8
Then they went out and fled from the tomb,
seized with trembling and bewilderment. They said nothing to anyone, for they
were afraid. 
9
( 
[2]
 When he had risen, early
on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom
he had driven seven demons. 
10
She went and told his companions who were
mourning and weeping. 
11
When they heard that he was alive and had been
seen by her, they did not believe. 
12
After this he appeared in another form to two
of them walking along on their way to the country. 
13
They returned and told the others; but they did
not believe them either. 
14
(But) later, as the eleven were at table, he
appeared to them and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart
because they had not believed those who saw him after he had been raised. 
15
He said to them, "Go into the whole world
and proclaim the gospel to every creature. 
16
Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved;
whoever does not believe will be condemned. 
17
These signs will accompany those who believe:
in my name they will drive out demons, they will speak new languages. 
18
They will pick up serpents (with their hands),
and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them. They will lay hands
on the sick, and they will recover." 
19
So then the Lord Jesus, after he spoke to them,
was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God. 
20
But they went forth and preached everywhere,
while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the word through accompanying
signs.) 
[3]
1
 [1-8] The purpose of this narrative
is to show that the tomb is empty and that Jesus has been raised
(
⇒
 Mark 16:6) and is going before you to Galilee
(
⇒
 Mark 16:7) in fulfillment of
⇒
 Mark 14:28. The women find the tomb empty, and an
angel stationed there announces to them what has happened. They are told to
proclaim the news to Peter and the disciples in order to prepare them for a
reunion with him. Mark's composition of the gospel ends at
⇒
 Mark 16:8 with the women telling no one, because
they were afraid. This abrupt termination causes some to believe that the
original ending of this gospel may have been lost. See the following note. 
2
 [9-20] This passage, termed the
Longer Ending to the Marcan gospel by comparison with a much briefer conclusion
found in some less important manuscripts, has traditionally been accepted as a
canonical part of the gospel and was defined as such by the Council of Trent.
Early citations of it by the Fathers indicate that it was composed by the
second century, although vocabulary and style indicate that it was written by
someone other than Mark. It is a general resume of the material concerning the
appearances of the risen Jesus, reflecting, in particular, traditions found in
Luke 24 and John 20. The Shorter Ending: Found after 
⇒
16:8 before the Longer Ending in four seventh-to-ninth-century Greek
manuscripts as well as in one Old Latin version, where it appears alone without
the Longer Ending. The Freer Logion: Found after v 14 in a fourth-fifth century
manuscript preserved in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, this ending
was known to Jerome in the fourth century. It reads: "And they excused
themselves, saying, "This age of lawlessness and unbelief is under Satan,
who does not allow the truth and power of God to prevail over the unclean
things dominated by the spirits [or, does not allow the unclean things
dominated by the spirits to grasp the truth and power of God]. Therefore reveal
your righteousness now.' They spoke to Christ. And Christ responded to them,
"The limit of the years of Satan's power is completed, but other terrible
things draw near. And for those who sinned I was handed over to death, that
they might return to the truth and no longer sin, in order that they might
inherit the spiritual and incorruptible heavenly glory of righteousness. But .
. . .' "
3
 [20] THE SHORTER ENDING - [And they
reported all the instructions briefly to Peter's companions. Afterwards Jesus
himself, through them, sent forth from east to west the sacred and imperishable
proclamation of eternal salvation. Amen.]