1
You would be in the right, O LORD, if I should
dispute with you; even so, I must discuss the case with you. Why does the way
of the godless prosper, why live all the treacherous in contentment? 
2
You planted them; they have taken root, they
keep on growing and bearing fruit. You are upon their lips, but far from their
inmost thoughts. 
3
[1]
 You, O Lord, know me, you see me, you have
found that at heart I am with you. Pick them out like sheep for the slaughter,
set them apart for the day of carnage. 
4
How long must the earth mourn, the green of the
whole countryside wither? For the wickedness of those who dwell in it beasts
and birds disappear, because they say, "God does not see our ways." 
5
If running against men has wearied you, how
will you race against horses? And if in a land of peace you fall headlong, what
will you do in the thickets of the Jordan? 
6
For even your own brothers, the members of your
father's house, betray you; they have recruited a force against you. Do not
believe them, even if they are friendly to you in their words. 
19
[2]
 Yet I, like a trusting lamb led to slaughter,
had not realized that they were hatching plots against me: "Let us destroy
the tree in its vigor; let us cut him off from the land of the living, so that
his name will be spoken no more." 
20
But, you, O LORD of hosts, O just Judge,
searcher of mind and heart, Let me witness the vengeance you take on them, for
to you I have entrusted my cause! 
21
Therefore, thus says the LORD concerning the
men of Anathoth who seek your life, saying, "Do not prophesy in the name
of the LORD; else you shall die by our hand." 
22
Therefore, thus says the LORD of hosts: I am
going to punish them. The young men shall die by the sword; their sons and
daughters shall die by famine. 
23
None shall be spared among them, for I will
bring misfortune upon the men of Anathoth, the year of their punishment. 
7
I abandon my house, cast off my heritage; The
beloved of my soul I deliver into the hand of her foes. 
8
My heritage has turned on me like a lion in the
jungle; Because she has roared against me, I treat her as an enemy. 
9
My heritage is a prey for hyenas, is surrounded
by vultures; Come, gather together, all you beasts of the field, come and eat! 
10
Many shepherds have ravaged my vineyard, have
trodden my heritage underfoot; The portion that delighted me they have turned
into a desert waste. 
11
They have made it a mournful waste, desolate it
lies before me, Desolate, all the land, because no one takes it to heart. 
12
Upon every desert height brigands have come up.
The LORD has a sword which consumes the land, from end to end: no peace for all
mankind. 
13
They have sown wheat and reaped thorns, they
have tired themselves out to no purpose; They recoil before their harvest, the
flaming anger of the LORD. 
14
[3]
 Thus says the LORD against all my evil
neighbors who plunder the heritage which I gave my people Israel as their own:
See, I will pluck them up from their land; the house of Judah I will pluck up
in their midst. 
15
But after plucking them up, I will pity them
again and bring them back, each to his heritage, each to his land. 
16
And if they carefully learn my people's custom
of swearing by my name, "As the LORD lives," they who formerly taught
my people to swear by Baal shall be built up in the midst of my people. 
17
But if they do not obey, I will uproot and destroy
that nation entirely, says the LORD. 
1
 [3] Jeremiah does not seek private
vengeance but the punishment of the wicked by the Lord; cf
⇒
 Jeremiah 20:12. Nevertheless, the prophet's
reaction to persecution shows the difference between the spirit of the Old
Testament and the New. 
2
 [19]
(11:19-23) These verses have been transposed
from Jer 11.
3
 [14] My evil neighbors: nations
surrounding Israel, the land belonging to the Lord; cf 
⇒
 Isaiah
8:8.