1
[1]
 In the tenth month of the ninth year of Zedekiah,
king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army marched
against Jerusalem and besieged it. 
2
[2]
 On the ninth day of the fourth month, in the
eleventh year of Zedekiah, a breach was made in the city's defenses. 
3
All the princes of the king of Babylon came and
occupied the middle gate: Nergal-sharezer, of Simmagir, the chief officer,
Nebushazban, the high dignitary, and all the other princes of the king of
Babylon. . . . 
4
[3]
 When Zedekiah, king of Judah, saw them, he and
all his warriors fled by night, leaving the city on the Royal Garden Road
through the gate between the two walls. He went in the direction of the Arabah,
5
[4]
 but the Chaldean army pursued them, and
overtook and captured Zedekiah in the desert near Jericho. He was brought to
Riblah, in the land of Hamath, where Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
pronounced sentence upon him. 
6
As Zedekiah looked on, his sons were slain at
Riblah by order of the king of Babylon, who slew also all the nobles of Judah. 
7
He then blinded Zedekiah and bound him in
chains to bring him to Babylon. 
8
The Chaldeans set fire to the king's palace and
the houses of the people, and demolished the walls of Jerusalem. 
9
Nebuzaradan, chief of the bodyguard, deported
to Babylon the rest of the people left in the city, those who had deserted to
him, and the rest of the workmen. 
10
But some of the poor who had no property were
left in the land of Judah by Nebuzaradan, chief of the bodyguard, and were
given at the same time vineyards and farms. 
11
Concerning Jeremiah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon, gave the following orders through Nebuzaradan, chief of the bodyguard:
12
"Take him and look after him; let no harm
befall him, but treat him as he himself requests." 
13
Thereupon Nebuzaradan, chief of the bodyguard,
and Nebushazban, the high dignitary, and Nergal-sharezer, the chief officer,
and all the nobles of the king of Babylon, 
14
had Jeremiah taken out of the quarters of the
guard, and entrusted to Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, to be brought
home. And so he remained among the people. 
15
While Jeremiah was still imprisoned in the
quarters of the guard, the word of the LORD came to him: 
16
Go, tell this to Ebed-melech the Cushite: Thus
says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I am now fulfilling the
words I spoke against this city, for evil and not for good; and this before
your very eyes. 
17
But on that day I will rescue you, says the LORD;
you shall not be handed over to the men of whom you are afraid. 
18
I will make certain that you escape and do not
fall by the sword. Your life shall be spared as booty, because you trusted in
me, says the LORD. 
1
 [1] The tenth month of the ninth
year: the month Tebet (mid-December to mid-January) of the year 589/8 B.C. 
2
 [2] The ninth day of the fourth
month, in the eleventh year: in July of 587 B.C.
3
 [4] The Royal Garden Road: along
the southeast side of the city; the royal garden was in the Kidron Valley. The
gate between the two walls: the southernmost city gate, at the end of the
Tyropoean Valley. The Arabah: the Jordan Valley. Zedekiah was attempting to
escape across the Jordan when he was captured near Jericho.
4
 [5] Riblah: Nebuchadnezzar's
headquarters in Syria, which had also been used by Pharaoh Neco
(
⇒
 2 Kings 23:33).