1
At that time, says the LORD, I will be the God
of all the tribes of Israel, and they shall be my people. 
2
[1]
 Thus says the LORD: The people that escaped
the sword have found favor in the desert. As Israel comes forward to be given
his rest, 
3
the LORD appears to him from afar: With age-old
love I have loved you; so I have kept my mercy toward you. 
4
Again I will restore you, and you shall be
rebuilt, O virgin Israel; Carrying your festive tambourines, you shall go forth
dancing with the merrymakers. 
5
Again you shall plant vineyards on the
mountains of Samaria; those who plant them shall enjoy the fruits. 
6
Yes, a day will come when the watchmen will
call out on Mount Ephraim: "Rise up, let us go to Zion, to the LORD, our
God." 
7
For thus says the LORD: Shout with joy for
Jacob, exult at the head of the nations; proclaim your praise and say: The LORD
has delivered his people, the remnant of Israel. 
8
Behold, I will bring them back from the land of
the north; I will gather them from the ends of the world, with the blind and
the lame in their midst, The mothers and those with child; they shall return as
an immense throng. 
9
They departed in tears, but I will console them
and guide them; I will lead them to brooks of water, on a level road, so that
none shall stumble. For I am a father to Israel, Ephraim is my first-born. 
10
Hear the word of the LORD, O nations, proclaim
it on distant coasts, and say: He who scattered Israel, now gathers them
together, he guards them as a shepherd his flock. 
11
The LORD shall ransom Jacob, he shall redeem
him from the hand of his conqueror. 
12
Shouting, they shall mount the heights of Zion,
they shall come streaming to the LORD'S blessings: The grain, the wine, and the
oil, the sheep and the oxen; They themselves shall be like watered gardens,
never again shall they languish. 
13
Then the virgins shall make merry and dance,
and young men and old as well. I will turn their mourning into joy, I will
console and gladden them after their sorrows. 
14
I will lavish choice portions upon the priests,
and my people shall be filled with my blessings, says the LORD. 
15
[2]
 Thus says the LORD: In Ramah is heard the
sound of moaning, of bitter weeping! Rachel mourns her children, she refuses to
be consoled because her children are no more. 
16
Thus says the LORD: Cease your cries of
mourning, wipe the tears from your eyes. The sorrow you have shown shall have
its reward, says the LORD, they shall return from the enemy's land. 
17
There is hope for your future, says the LORD;
your sons shall return to their own borders. 
18
I hear, I hear Ephraim pleading: You chastised
me, and I am chastened; I was an untamed calf. If you allow me, I will return,
for you are the LORD, my God. 
19
I turn in repentance; I have come to myself, I
strike my breast; I blush with shame, I bear the disgrace of my youth. 
20
Is Ephraim not my favored son, the child in
whom I delight? Often as I threaten him, I still remember him with favor; My
heart stirs for him, I must show him mercy, says the LORD. 
21
Set up road markers, put up guideposts; Turn
your attention to the highway, the road by which you went. Turn back, O virgin
Israel, turn back to these your cities. 
22
[3]
 How long will you continue to stray,
rebellious daughter? The LORD has created a new thing upon the earth: the woman
must encompass the man with devotion. 
23
Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
When I change their lot in the land of Judah and her cities, they shall again
repeat this greeting: "May the LORD bless you, holy mountain, abode of
justice!" 
24
Judah and all her cities, the farmers and those
who lead the flock, shall dwell there together. 
25
For I will refresh the weary soul; every soul
that languishes I will replenish. 
26
[4]
 Upon this I awoke and opened my eyes; but my
sleep was sweet to me. 
27
The days are coming, says the LORD, when I will
seed the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and the
seed of beast. 
28
As I once watched over them to uproot and pull
down, to destroy, to ruin, and to harm, so I will watch over them to build and
to plant, says the LORD. 
29
[5]
 In those days they shall no longer say,
"The fathers ate unripe grapes, and the children's teeth are set on
edge," 
30
but through his own fault only shall anyone
die: the teeth of him who eats the unripe grapes shall be set on edge. 
31
[6]
 The days are coming, says the LORD, when I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. 
32
It will not be like the covenant I made with
their fathers the day I took them by the hand to lead them forth from the land
of Egypt; for they broke my covenant and I had to show myself their master,
says the LORD. 
33
But this is the covenant which I will make with
the house of Israel after those days, says the LORD. I will place my law within
them, and write it upon their hearts; I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. 
34
No longer will they have need to teach their
friends and kinsmen how to know the LORD. All, from least to greatest, shall
know me, says the LORD, for I will forgive their evildoing and remember their
sin no more. 
35
Thus says the LORD, He who gives the sun to
light the day, moon and stars to light the night; Who stirs up the sea till its
waves roar, whose name is LORD of hosts: 
36
If ever these natural laws give way in spite of
me, says the LORD, Then shall the race of Israel cease as a nation before me
forever. 
37
Thus says the LORD: If the heavens on high can
be measured, or the foundations below the earth be sounded, Then will I cast
off the whole race of Israel because of all they have done, says the LORD. 
38
[7]
 The days are coming, says the LORD, when the
city shall be rebuilt as the LORD'S, from the Tower of Hananel to the Corner
Gate. 
39
The measuring line shall be stretched from
there straight to the hill Gareb and then turn to Goah. 
40
[8]
 The whole valley of corpses and ashes, all the
slopes toward the Kidron Valley, as far as the corner of the Horse Gate at the
east, shall be holy to the LORD. Never again shall the city be rooted up or
thrown down. 
1
 [2] The people that escaped the
sword: the exiles who were not killed but deported; they have found favor in
the desert, across which they were driven into captivity. The prophet alludes
to the first desert wandering of Israel (Exodus 16-18), in which the people
found the Lord. His rest: the land of promise. The perfect fulfillment of this
promised rest is found only in the New Testament (Hebrews 3-4). 
2
 [15] Ramah: a village about five
miles north of Jerusalem, where Rachel was buried (
⇒
 1 Sam
10:2). Rachel: said to mourn for her children since she was the
ancestress of Ephraim, the chief of the northern tribes. 
⇒
 Matthew
2:18 applies this verse to the slaughter of the innocents by Herod.
3
 [22] The woman must encompass the
man: the words "with devotion," not in the Hebrew, are added for the
sense. No fully satisfactory explanation has been given this text. Among the
more probable are these: (a) Formerly the man (the Lord) encompassed the woman
(Israel) with mercy and devotion; now in the spiritual religion of Israel which
will follow on the restoration, this order will be reversed. (b) So secure will
Israel be after the restoration that women will no longer need the natural
protection of their husbands, but even weak women can protect men. (c) St.
Jerome in his commentary on this verse understood it of Mary's virginal
conception of Christ. "The LORD has created a new thing on earth; without
seed of man, without carnal union and conception, "a woman will encompass
a man' within her womb-One who, though He will later appear to advance in
wisdom and age through the stages of infancy and childhood, yet, while confined
for the usual number of months in his mother's womb, will already be perfect
man."
4
 [26] I awoke . . . sweet to me:
probably said by the prophet himself.
5
 [29] "The fathers . . . on
edge": a proverb used in Israel, expressing the idea that children suffer
for the sins of their parents (cf 
⇒
 Ezekiel 18:2).
The Israel of the restoration will be characterized instead by personal
responsibility and retribution for one's acts (v 30; cf 
⇒
31:31-34).
6
 [31-34] The new covenant to be made
with Israel is a common theme of the prophets, beginning with Hosea. According
to Jeremiah, the qualities of the new covenant that make it different from the
old are: (a) It will not be broken, but will last forever; (b) Its law will be
written in the heart, not merely on tablets of stone; (c) The knowledge of God
will be so generally shown forth in the life of the people that it will no
longer be necessary to put it into words of instruction. In the fullest sense,
this prophecy was fulfilled only through the work of Jesus Christ; cf
⇒
 Luke 22:20; 
⇒
 1 Cor
11:25.
7
 [38] From the Tower of Hananel to
the Corner Gate: from the northeast to the northwest.
8
 [40] Valley of corpses and ashes:
the Valley of Ben-hinnom, which joins the
Kidron at the southeast of ancient Jerusalem. The Horse Gate: in the eastern
city wall, at the southeast corner of the temple area.