1
When Simon heard that Trypho was gathering a
large army to invade and ravage the land of Judah, 
2
and saw that the people were in dread and
terror, he went up to Jerusalem. There he assembled the people 
3
and exhorted them in these words: "You
know what I, my brothers, and my father's house have done for the laws and the
sanctuary; what battles and disasters we have been through. 
4
It was for the sake of these, for the sake of
Israel, that all my brothers have perished, and I alone am left. 
5
Far be it from me, then, to save my own life in
any time of distress, for I am not better than my brothers. 
6
Rather will I avenge my nation and the
sanctuary, as well as your wives and children, for all the nations out of
hatred have united to destroy us." 
7
As the people heard these words, their spirit
was rekindled. 
8
They shouted in reply: "You are our leader
in place of your brothers Judas and Jonathan. 
9
Fight our battles, and we will do everything
that you tell us." 
10
So Simon mustered all the men able to fight,
and quickly completing the walls of Jerusalem, fortified it on every side. 
11
He sent Jonathan, son of Absalom, to Joppa with
a large force; Jonathan drove out the occupants and remained there. 
12
Then Trypho moved from Ptolemais with a large
army to invade the land of Judah, bringing Jonathan with him as a prisoner. 
13
But Simon pitched his camp at Adida, facing the
plain. 
14
When Trypho learned that Simon had succeeded
his brother Jonathan, and that he intended to fight him, he sent envoys to him
with this message: 
15
"We have detained your brother Jonathan on
account of the money that he owed the royal treasury in connection with the
offices that he held. 
16
Therefore, if you send us a hundred talents of
silver, and two of his sons as hostages to guarantee that when he is set free
he will not revolt against us, we will release him." 
17
Although Simon knew that they were speaking
deceitfully to him, he gave orders to get the money and the boys, for fear of
provoking much hostility among the people, who might say 
18
that Jonathan perished because Simon would not
send Trypho the money and the boys. 
19
So he sent the boys and the hundred talents;
but Trypho broke his promise and would not let Jonathan go. 
20
[1]
 Next he began to invade and ravage the
country. His troops went around by the road that leads to Adora, but Simon and
his army moved along opposite him everywhere he went. 
21
The men in the citadel sent messengers to
Trypho, urging him to come to them by way of the desert, and to send them
provisions. 
22
Although Trypho got all his cavalry ready to
go, there was a heavy fall of snow that night, and he could not go. So he left
for Gilead. 
23
[2]
 When he was approaching Baskama, he had
Jonathan killed and buried there. 
24
Then Trypho returned to his own country. 
25
Simon sent for the remains of his brother
Jonathan, and buried him in Modein, the city of his fathers. 
26
All Israel bewailed him with solemn
lamentation, mourning over him for many days. 
27
Then Simon erected over the tomb of his father
and his brothers a monument of stones, polished front and back, and raised high
enough to be seen at a distance. 
28
He set up seven pyramids facing one another for
his father and his mother and his four brothers. 
29
For the pyramids he devised a setting of big
columns, on which he carved suits of armor as a perpetual memorial, and next to
the armor he placed carved ships, which could be seen by all who sailed the
sea. 
30
This tomb which he built at Modein is there to
the present day. 
31
Trypho dealt treacherously with the young King
Antiochus. He killed him 
32
and assumed the kingship in his place, putting
on the crown of Asia. Thus he brought much evil on the land. 
33
Simon, on his part, built up the strongholds of
Judea, strengthening their fortifications with high towers, thick walls, and
gates with bars, and he stored up provisions in the fortresses. 
34
Simon also sent chosen men to King Demetrius
with the request that he grant the land a release from taxation, for all that
Trypho did was to plunder the land. 
35
In reply, King Demetrius sent him the following
letter: 
36
"King Demetrius sends greetings to Simon
the high priest, the friend of kings, and to the elders and the Jewish people. 
37
We have received the gold crown and the palm
branch that you sent. We are willing to be on most peaceful terms with you and
to write to our official to grant you release from tribute. 
38
Whatever we have guaranteed to you remains in
force, and the strongholds that you have built shall remain yours. 
39
We remit any oversights and defaults incurred
up to now, as well as the crown tax that you owe. Any other tax that may have
been collected in Jerusalem shall no longer be collected there. 
40
If any of you are qualified for enrollment in
our service, let them be enrolled. Let there be peace between us." 
41
[3]
 Thus in the year one hundred and seventy, the
yoke of the Gentiles was removed from Israel, 
42
and the people began to write in their records
and contracts, "In the first year of Simon, high priest, governor, and
leader of the Jews." 
43
[4]
 In those days Simon besieged Gazara and
surrounded it with troops. He made a siege machine, pushed it up against the
city, and attacked and captured one of the towers. 
44
The men who had been on the siege machine
jumped down into the city and caused a great tumult there. 
45
The men of the city, joined by their wives and
children, went up on the wall, with their garments rent, and cried out in loud
voices, begging Simon to grant them peace. 
46
"Do not treat us according to our evil
deeds," they said, "but according to your mercy." 
47
So Simon came to terms with them and did not
destroy them. He made them leave the city, however, and he purified the houses
in which there were idols. Then he entered the city with hymns and songs of
praise. 
48
After removing from it everything that was
impure, he settled there men who observed the law. He improved its
fortifications and built himself a residence. 
49
The men in the citadel in Jerusalem were
prevented from going out into the country and back for the purchase of food;
they suffered greatly from hunger, and many of them died of starvation. 
50
They finally cried out to Simon for peace, and
he gave them peace. He expelled them from the citadel and cleansed it of
impurities. 
51
[5]
 On the twenty-third day of the second month,
in the year one hundred and seventy-one, the Jews entered the citadel with
shouts of jubilation, waving of palm branches, the music of harps and cymbals
and lyres, and the singing of hymns and canticles, because a great enemy of
Israel had been destroyed. 
52
Simon decreed that this day should be
celebrated every year with rejoicing. He also strengthened the fortifications
of the temple hill alongside the citadel, and he and his companions dwelt
there. 
53
[6]
 Seeing that his son John was now a grown man,
Simon made him commander of all his soldiers, with his residence in Gazara. 
1
 [20-21] The invaders made a wide
flanking; movement to invade Judea from the south. Adora was a few miles
southwest of Beth-zur. They would avoid Beth-zur itself and other strongholds
of the Maccabees by following the way of the desert. 
2
 [23] Bashama: northeast of the Sea
of Galilee.
3
 [41] The year one hundred and
seventy: March, 142, to April, 141 B.C., by the temple calendar.
4
 [43] Gazara: a key position in the
Shephelah, fortified by Bacchides in 160 B.C.; cf 9,52.
5
 [51] The twenty-third day of the
second month: June 3, 141 B.C.
6
 [53] John: John Hyrcanus, who was
to succeed his father as ruler and high priest; cf 
⇒
 1 Macc
16:23-24.