1
[1]
 Antiochus, son of King Demetrius, sent a
letter from the islands of the sea to Simon, the priest and ethnarch of the
Jews, and to all the nation, 
2
which read as follows: "King Antiochus
sends greetings to Simon, the priest and ethnarch, and to the Jewish nation. 
3
Whereas certain villains have gained control of
the kingdom of my ancestors, I intend to reclaim it, that I may restore it to
its former state. I have recruited a large number of mercenary troops and
equipped warships 
4
to make a landing in my country and take
revenge on those who have ruined it and laid waste many cities in my realm. 
5
"Now, therefore, I confirm to you all the
tax exemptions that the kings before me granted you and whatever other
privileges they conferred on you. 
6
I authorize you to coin your own money, as
legal tender in your country. 
7
Jerusalem and its temple shall be free. All the
weapons you have prepared and all the strongholds you have built and now occupy
shall remain in your possession. 
8
All debts, present or future, due to the royal
treasury shall be canceled for you, now and for all time. 
9
When we recover our kingdom, we will greatly
honor you and your nation and the temple, so that your glory will be manifest
in all the earth." 
10
[2]
 In the year one hundred and seventy-four
Antiochus invaded the land of his ancestors, and all the troops rallied to him,
so that few were left with Trypho. 
11
[3]
 Pursued by Antiochus, Trypho fled to Dor, by
the sea, 
12
realizing what a mass of troubles had come upon
him now that his soldiers had deserted him. 
13
Antiochus encamped before Dor with a hundred
and twenty thousand infantry and eight thousand horsemen. 
14
While he invested the city, his ships closed in
along the coast, so that he blockaded it by land and sea and let no one go in
or out. 
15
Meanwhile, Numenius and his companions left
Rome with letters such as this addressed to various kings and countries: 
16
[4]
 "Lucius, Consul of the Romans, sends
greetings to King Ptolemy. 
17
Certain envoys of the Jews, our friends and
allies, have come to us to renew their earlier alliance of friendship. They had
been sent by Simon the high priest and the Jewish people, 
18
and they brought with them a gold shield worth
a thousand minas. 
19
Therefore we have decided to write to various
kings and countries, that they are not to harm them, or wage war against them
or their cities or their country, and are not to assist those who fight against
them. 
20
We have also decided to accept the shield from
them. 
21
If, then, any troublemakers from their country
take refuge with you, hand them over to Simon the high priest, so that he may
punish them according to their law." 
22
[5]
 The consul sent similar letters to Kings
Demetrius, Attalus, Ariarthes and Arsaces; 
23
to all the countries - Sampsames, Sparta,
Delos, Myndos, Sicyon, Caria, Samos, Pamphylia, Lycia, Halicarnassus, Rhodes,
Phaselis, Cos, Side, Aradus, Gortyna, Cnidus, Cyprus, and Cyrene. 
24
A copy of the letter was also sent to Simon the
high priest. 
25
When King Antiochus was encamped before Dor, he
assaulted it continuously both with troops and with the siege machines he had
made. He blockaded Trypho by preventing anyone from going in or out. 
26
Simon sent to Antiochus' support two thousand
elite troops, together with gold and silver and much equipment. 
27
But he refused to accept the aid; in fact, he
broke all the agreements he had previously made with Simon and became hostile
toward him. 
28
He sent Athenobius, one of his Friends, to
confer with Simon and say: "You are occupying Joppa and Gazara and the
citadel of Jerusalem; these are cities of my kingdom. 
29
You have laid waste their territories, done
great harm to the land, and taken possession of many districts in my realm. 
30
Therefore, give up the cities you have seized
and the tribute money of the districts outside the territory of Judea of which
you have taken possession; 
31
or instead, pay me five hundred talents of
silver for the devastation you have caused and five hundred talents more for
the tribute money of the cities. If you do not do this, we will come and make
war on you." 
32
So Athenobius, the king's Friend, came to
Jerusalem and on seeing the splendor of Simon's court, the gold and silver
plate on the sideboard, and the rest of his rich display, he was amazed. When
he gave him the king's message, 
33
Simon said to him in reply: "We have not
seized any foreign land; what we took is not the property of others, but our
ancestral heritage which for a time had been unjustly held by our enemies. 
34
Now that we have the opportunity, we are
holding on to the heritage of our ancestors. 
35
As for Joppa and Gazara, which you demand, the
men of these cities were doing great harm to our people and laying waste our
country; however, we are willing to pay you a hundred talents for these
cities." 
36
Athenobius made no reply, but returned to the
king in anger. When he told him of Simon's words, of his splendor, and of all
he had seen, the king fell into a violent rage. 
37
[6]
 Trypho had gotten aboard a ship and escaped to
Orthosia. 
38
Then the king appointed Cendebeus
commander-in-chief of the seacoast, and gave him infantry and cavalry forces. 
39
[7]
 He ordered him to move his troops against
Judea and to fortify Kedron and strengthen its gates, so that he could launch
attacks against the Jewish people. Meanwhile the king went in pursuit of
Trypho. 
40
When Cendebeus came to Jamnia, he began to
harass the people and to make incursions into Judea, where he took people
captive or massacred them. 
41
As the king ordered, he fortified Kedron and
stationed horsemen and infantry there, so that they could go out and patrol the
roads of Judea. 
1
 [1] Antiochus: Antiochus VII
Sidetes, son of Demetrius I, and younger brother of Demetrius II, now a
prisoner of the Parthians. At the age of twenty he set out from the island of
Rhodes to take his brother's place and drive out the usurper Trypho. 
2
 [10] The year one hundred and
seventy-four: 138 B.C.
3
 [11] Dor, by the sea: a fortress on
the Palestinian coast, fifteen miles south of Carmel.
4
 [16] Lucius: Perhaps Lucius
Caecilius Metellus, consul in 142 B.C., or Lucius Calpurnicus Piso, consul in
140-139 B.C. This document pertains to Simon's first years as leader.
5
 [22] Attalus: Attalus II of
Pergamum, reigned 159-138 B.C. Ariarthes: Ariarthes V of Cappadocia, reigned
162-130 B.C. Arsaces: see note on 
⇒
 1 Macc 14:2.
6
 [37] Orthosia: a port between
Tripoli and the Eleutherus River.
7
 [39] Kedron: a few miles southeast
of Jamnia and facing the fortress of Gazara held by John Hyrcanus.