1
[1]
[2]
 Judas had heard of the
reputation of the Romans. They were valiant fighters and acted amiably to all
who took their side. They established a friendly alliance with all who applied
to them. 
2
[3]
 He was also told of their battles and the
brave deeds that they had performed against the Gauls, conquering them and
forcing them to pay tribute. 
3
They had gotten possession of the silver and
gold mines in Spain, 
4
and by planning and persistence had conquered
the whole country, although it was very remote from their own. They had crushed
the kings who had come against them from the far corners of the earth and had
inflicted on them severe defeat, and the rest paid tribute to them every year. 
5
[4]
 Philip and Perseus, king of the Macedonians,
and the others who opposed them in battle had been overwhelmed and subjugated. 
6
[5]
 Antiochus the Great, king of Asia, who had
fought against them with a hundred and twenty elephants and with cavalry and
chariots and a very great army, had been defeated by them. 
7
They had taken him alive and obliged him and
the kings who succeeded him to pay a heavy tribute, to give hostages and a
section of 
8
[6]
 Lycia, Mysia, and Lydia from among their best
provinces. The Romans took these from him and gave them to King Eumenes. 
9
[7]
 When the men of Greece had planned to come and
destroy them, 
10
the Romans discovered it, and sent against the
Greeks a single general who made war on them. Many were wounded and fell, and
the Romans took their wives and children captive. They plundered them, took
possession of their land, tore down their strongholds and reduced them to
slavery even to this day. 
11
All the other kingdoms and islands that had
ever opposed them they destroyed and enslaved; 
12
with their friends, however, and those who
relied on them, they maintained friendship. They had conquered kings both far
and near, and all who heard of their fame were afraid of them. 
13
In truth, those whom they desired to help to a
kingdom became kings, and those whom they wished to depose they deposed; and
they were greatly exalted. 
14
Yet with all this, none of them put on a crown
or wore purple as a display of grandeur. 
15
They had made for themselves a senate house,
and every day three hundred and twenty men took counsel, deliberating on all
that concerned the people and their well-being. 
16
[8]
 They entrusted their government to one man
every year, to rule over their entire country, and they all obeyed that one,
and there was no envy or jealousy among them. 
17
So Judas chose Eupolemus, son of John, son of
Accos, and Jason, son of Eleazar, and sent them to Rome to establish an
alliance of friendship with them. 
18
He did this to get rid of the yoke, for it was
obvious that the kingdom of the Greeks was subjecting Israel to slavery. 
19
After making a very long journey to Rome, the
envoys entered the senate and spoke as follows: 
20
"Judas, called Maccabeus, and his
brothers, with the Jewish people, have sent us to you to make a peaceful
alliance with you, and to enroll ourselves among your allies and friends."
21
The proposal pleased the Romans, 
22
[9]
 and this is a copy of the reply they inscribed
on bronze tablets and sent to Jerusalem, to remain there with the Jews as a
record of peace and alliance: 
23
"May it be well with the Romans and the
Jewish nation at sea and on land forever; may sword and enemy be far from them.
24
But if war is first made on Rome, or any of its
allies in any of their dominions, 
25
the Jewish nation will help them
wholeheartedly, as the occasion shall demand; 
26
and to those who wage war they shall not give
nor provide grain, arms, money, or ships; this is Rome's decision. They shall
fulfill their obligations without receiving any recompense. 
27
In the same way, if war is made first on the
Jewish nation, the Romans will help them willingly, as the occasion shall
demand, 
28
and to those who are attacking them there shall
not be given grain, arms, money, or ships; this is Rome's decision. They shall
fulfill their obligations without deception. 
29
On these terms the Romans have made an
agreement with the Jewish people. 
30
But if both parties hereafter decide to add or
take away anything, they shall do as they choose, and whatever they shall add
or take away shall be valid. 
31
"Moreover, concerning the wrongs that King
Demetrius has done to them, we have written to him thus: 'Why have you made
your yoke heavy upon our friends and allies the Jews? 
32
If they complain about you again, we will do
them justice and make war on you by land and sea.'" 
1
 [1] This chapter contains the
account of the embassy which Judas sent to Rome, probably before the death of
Nicanor, to conclude a treaty of alliance between Rome and the Jewish nation.
Without precise chronology, the pertinent data are gathered into a unified
theme.
2
 [1] The image of the Roman Republic
greatly impressed the smaller Eastern peoples seeking support against their overlords
(
⇒
 1 Macc 8:1-16), because of Roman success in war
(
⇒
 1 Macc 8:2-11) and effective aid to their allies
(
⇒
 1 Macc 8:12-13). Numerous interventions by Rome
in the politics of the Near East bear witness to its power and prestige in the
second century B.C. Cf 
⇒
 1 Macc 1:10;
⇒
 7:2; 
⇒
 12:3;
⇒
 15:15-24; 
⇒
 2 Macc
11:34. With the Roman control of Palestine in 63 B.C., the Republic
and later the Empire became heartily detested. The eulogy of Rome in this
chapter is one of the reasons why 1 Maccabees was not preserved by the
Palestinian Jews of the century that followed. 
3
 [2] Gauls: probably the Celts of
northern Italy and southern France, subdued by the Romans in 222 B.C., and
again in 200-191 B.C.; but perhaps also those in Asia Minor (the Galatians),
whom the Romans defeated in 189 B.C.
4
 [5] Phillip: Phillip V of
Macedonia, defeated by a Graeco-Roman alliance at Cynoscephalae in 197 B.C.
Perseus, his son, was defeated at Pydna in 168 B.C., and died a prisoner. With
this, the kingdom of Macedonia came to an end.
5
 [6] Antiochus: Antiochus III,
greatest of the Seleucid kings. He was defeated at Magnesia in 190 B.C. By the
Treaty of Apamea in 189, he was obliged to pay Rome a crushing indemnity of 15,
000 talents. It was the weakening of Antiochene power and the growing military
and economic influence of Rome that led Antiochus IV to adopt the policy of
political, religious and cultural unification of Syria and Palestine.
6
 [8] Lycia, Mysia: regions in
western Asia Minor. These names are restored here by conjectural emendation;
the Greek text has "India, Media," most likely through scribal error.
Eumenes: Eumenes II (197-158), king of Pergamum, an ally of Rome who benefited
greatly from Antiochus' losses.
7
 [9-10] The revolt of the Achaean
League, inserted here, occurred in 146 B.C., after Judas' time. It was crushed
by the Roman consul Lucius Mummius and marked the end of Greek independence.
The author regards all Greeks as the enemies of God.
8
 [16] They entrusted their
government to one man: actually the Roman Republic always had two consuls as
joint heads of the government. Presumably, a single one dealt with embassies
and answered letters, hence the impression the Jews received; cf
⇒
 1 Macc 8:15, 
⇒
 16.
9
 [22] The reply . . . on bronze
tablets and sent to Jerusalem: The decree of the Senate would be inscribed on
bronze and kept in the Roman Capitol, with only a copy in letter form sent to
Jerusalem. The translation of the decree into Hebrew and then into Greek, as
found here in 1 Macc, may have occasioned this error.