1
[1]
 In the year one hundred and sixty, Alexander,
who was called Epiphanes, son of Antiochus, came up and took Ptolemais. He was
accepted and began to reign there. 
2
When King Demetrius heard of it, he mustered a
very large army and marched out to engage him in combat. 
3
Demetrius sent a letter to Jonathan written in
peaceful terms, to pay him honor; 
4
for he said: "Let us be the first to make
peace with him, before he makes peace with Alexander against us, 
5
since he will remember all the wrongs we have
done to him, his brothers, and his nation." 
6
So Demetrius authorized him to gather an army
and procure arms as his ally; and he ordered that the hostages in the citadel
be released to him. 
7
Accordingly Jonathan went up to Jerusalem and
read the letter to all the people. The men in the citadel 
8
were struck with fear when they heard that the
king had given him authority to gather an army. 
9
They released the hostages to Jonathan, and he
gave them back to their parents. 
10
Thereafter Jonathan dwelt in Jerusalem, and
began to build and restore the city. 
11
He ordered the workmen to build the walls and
encircle Mount Zion with square stones for its fortification, which they did. 
12
The foreigners in the strongholds that
Bacchides had built, took flight; 
13
each one of them left his place and returned to
his own country. 
14
Only in Beth-zur did some remain of those who
had abandoned the law and the commandments, for they used it as a place of
refuge. 
15
King Alexander heard of the promises that
Demetrius had made to Jonathan; he was also told of the battles and valiant
deeds of Jonathan and his brothers and the troubles that they had endured. 
16
He said, "Shall we ever find another man
like him? Let us now make him our friend and ally." 
17
So he sent Jonathan a letter written in these
terms: 
18
"King Alexander sends greetings to his
brother Jonathan. 
19
We have heard of you, that you are a mighty
warrior and worthy to be our friend. 
20
We have therefore appointed you today to be
high priest of your nation; you are to be called the King's Friend, and you are
to look after our interests and preserve amity with us." He also sent him
a purple robe and a crown of gold. 
21
[2]
 Jonathan put on the sacred vestments in the
seventh month of the year one hundred and sixty at the feast of Booths, and he
gathered an army and procured many arms. 
22
When Demetrius heard of these things, he was
distressed and said: 
23
"Why have we allowed Alexander to get
ahead of us by gaining the friendship of the Jews and thus strengthening
himself? 
24
I too will write them conciliatory words and
offer dignities and gifts, so that they may be an aid to me." 
25
So he sent them this message: "King
Demetrius sends greetings to the Jewish nation. 
26
We have heard how you have kept the treaty with
us and continued in our friendship and not gone over to our enemies, and we are
glad. 
27
Continue, therefore, to keep faith with us, and
we will reward you with favors in return for what you do in our behalf. 
28
We will grant you many exemptions and will
bestow gifts on you. 
29
"I now free you, as I also exempt all the
Jews, from the tribute, the salt tax, and the crown levies. 
30
[3]
 Instead of collecting the third of the grain
and the half of the fruit of the trees that should be my share, I renounce the
right from this day forward: Neither now nor in the future will I collect them
from the land of Judah or from the three districts annexed from Samaria. 
31
Let Jerusalem and her territory, her tithes and
her tolls, be sacred and free from tax. 
32
I also yield my authority over the citadel in
Jerusalem, and I transfer it to the high priest, that he may put in it such men
as he shall choose to guard it. 
33
Every one of the Jews who has been carried into
captivity from the land of Judah into any part of my kingdom I set at liberty
without ransom; and let all their taxes, even those on their cattle, be
canceled. 
34
Let all feast days, sabbaths, new moon
festivals, appointed days, and the three days that precede each feast day, and
the three days that follow, be days of immunity and exemption for every Jew in
my kingdom. 
35
Let no man have authority to exact payment from
them or to molest any of them in any matter. 
36
"Let thirty thousand Jews be enrolled in
the king's army and allowances be given them, as is due to all the king's
soldiers. 
37
Let some of them be stationed in the king's
principal strongholds, and of these let some be given positions of trust in the
affairs of the kingdom. Let their superiors and their rulers be taken from
among them, and let them follow their own laws, as the king has commanded in
the land of Judah. 
38
"Let the three districts that have been
added to Judea from the province of Samaria be incorporated with Judea so that
they may be under one man and obey no other authority than the high priest. 
39
Ptolemais and its confines I give as a present
to the sanctuary in Jerusalem for the necessary expenses of the sanctuary. 
40
I make a yearly personal grant of fifteen
thousand silver shekels out of the royal revenues, from appropriate places. 
41
All the additional funds that the officials did
not hand over as they had done in the first years, shall henceforth be handed
over for the services of the temple. 
42
Moreover, the dues of five thousand silver
shekels that used to be taken from the revenue of the sanctuary every year
shall be canceled, since these funds belong to the priests who perform the
services. 
43
Whoever takes refuge in the temple of Jerusalem
or in any of its precincts, because of money he owes the king, or because of
any other debt, shall be released, together with all the goods he possesses in
my kingdom. \ 
44
The cost of rebuilding and restoring the
structures of the sanctuary shall be covered out of the royal revenue. 
45
Likewise the cost of building the walls of
Jerusalem and fortifying it all around, and of building walls in Judea, shall
be donated from the royal revenue." 
46
When Jonathan and the people heard these words,
they neither believed nor accepted them, for they remembered the great evil
that Demetrius had done in Israel, and how sorely he had afflicted them. 
47
They therefore decided in favor of Alexander,
for he had been the first to address them peaceably, and they remained his
allies for the rest of his life. 
48
King Alexander gathered together a large army
and encamped opposite Demetrius. 
49
The two kings joined battle, and when the army
of Demetrius fled, Alexander pursued him, and overpowered his soldiers. 
50
He pressed the battle hard until sunset, and
Demetrius fell that day. 
51
Alexander sent ambassadors to Ptolemy, king of
Egypt, with this message: 
52
"Now that I have returned to my realm,
taken my seat on the throne of my fathers, and established my rule by crushing
Demetrius and gaining control of my country - 
53
for I engaged him in battle, defeated him and
his army, and recovered the royal throne - 
54
let us now establish friendship with each
other. Give me your daughter for my wife; and as your son-in-law, I will give
to you and to her gifts worthy of you." 
55
King Ptolemy answered in these words:
"Happy the day on which you returned to the land of your fathers and took
your seat on their royal throne! 
56
I will do for you what you have written; but
meet me in Ptolemais, so that we may see each other, and I will become your
father-in-law as you have proposed." 
57
[4]
 So Ptolemy with his daughter Cleopatra set out
from Egypt and came to Ptolemais in the year one hundred and sixty-two. 
58
There King Alexander met him, and Ptolemy gave
him his daughter Cleopatra in marriage. Their wedding was celebrated at
Ptolemais with great splendor according to the custom of kings. 
59
King Alexander also wrote to Jonathan to come
and meet him. 
60
So he went with pomp to Ptolemais, where he met
the two kings and gave them and their friends silver and gold and many gifts
and thus won their favor. 
61
Some pestilent Israelites, transgressors of the
law, united against him to accuse him, but the king paid no heed to them. 
62
He ordered Jonathan to be divested of his
ordinary garments and to be clothed in royal purple; and so it was done. 
63
The king also had him seated at his side. He
said to his magistrates: "Go with him to the center of the city and make a
proclamation that no one is to bring charges against him on any grounds or be
troublesome to him in any way." 
64
When his accusers saw the honor paid to him in
the proclamation, and the purple with which he was clothed, they all fled. 
65
The king also honored him by numbering him
among his Chief Friends and made him military commander and governor of the province.
66
So Jonathan returned in peace and happiness to
Jerusalem. 
67
[5]
 In the year one hundred and sixty-five,
Demetrius, son of Demetrius, came from Crete to the land of his fathers. 
68
When King Alexander heard of it he was greatly
troubled, and returned to Antioch. 
69
Demetrius appointed Apollonius governor of
Coelesyria. Having gathered a large army, Appollonius pitched his camp at
Jamnia. From there he sent this message to Jonathan the high priest: 
70
"You are the only one who resists us. I am
laughed at and put to shame on your account. Why are you displaying power
against us in the mountains? 
71
If you have confidence in your forces, come
down now to us in the plain, and let us test each other's strength there; the
city forces are on my side. 
72
Inquire and learn who I am and who the others
are who are helping me. Men say that you cannot make a stand against us because
your fathers were twice put to flight in their own land. 
73
Now you too will be unable to withstand our
cavalry and such a force as this in the plain, where there is not a stone or a
pebble or a place to flee." 
74
When Jonathan heard the message of Apollonius,
he was roused. Choosing ten thousand men, he set out from Jerusalem, and Simon
his brother joined him to help him. 
75
He pitched camp near Joppa, but the men in the
city shut him out because Apollonius had a garrison there. When the Jews
besieged it, 
76
[6]
 the men of the city became afraid and opened
the gates, and so Jonathan took possession of Joppa. 
77
When Apollonius heard of it, he drew up three
thousand horsemen and an innumerable infantry. He marched on Azotus as though
he were going on through the country, but at the same time he advanced into the
plain, because he had such a large number of horsemen to rely on. 
78
Jonathan followed him to Azotus, and they
engaged in battle. 
79
Apollonius, however, had left a thousand
cavalry in hiding behind them. 
80
When Jonathan discovered that there was an
ambush behind him, his army was surrounded. From morning until evening they
showered his men with arrows. 
81
But his men held their ground, as Jonathan had
commanded, whereas the enemy's horses became tired out. 
82
When the horsemen were exhausted, Simon
attacked the phalanx, overwhelmed it and put it to flight. 
83
The horsemen too were scattered over the plain.
The enemy fled to Azotus and entered Beth-dagon, the temple of their idol, to
save themselves. 
84
But Jonathan burned and plundered Azotus with
its neighboring towns, and destroyed by fire both the temple of Dagon and the
men who had taken refuge in it. 
85
Those who fell by the sword, together with
those who were burned alive, came to about eight thousand men. 
86
Then Jonathan left there and pitched his camp
at Ashkalon, and the people of that city came out to meet him with great pomp. 
87
He and his men then returned to Jerusalem,
laden with much booty. 
88
When King Alexander heard of these events, he
accorded new honors to Jonathan. 
89
[7]
 He sent him a gold buckle, such as is usually
given to King's Kinsmen; he also gave him Ekron and all its territory as a possession.
1
 [1] The year one hundred and sixty:
152 B.C. Alexander . . . Antiochus: Alexander Balas claimed to be a son of
Antiochus IV. He had the backing of the Romans, who had never forgiven
Demetrius for becoming king without their permission. The latter meanwhile had
become unpopular with his own people as well as with the Jews. 
2
 [21] Jonathan . . . feast of
Booths: Jonathan began to discharge the office of high priest October 23-30,
152 B.C. For seven years after the death of Alcimus there had been no high
priest in Jerusalem. It was taken for granted that the king, though a Gentile,
had the power to appoint one. The Maccabees, though a priestly family, were not
of the line of Zadok, and some in Israel regarded Jonathan's tenure as a
usurpation.
3
 [30] The three districts annexed
from Samaria: mentioned by name in 1 Maccc 11;34. The present Greek text, by a
scribal error, has added "and Galilee" after "Samaria."
4
 [57] Cleopatra: Cleopatra Thea,
then about fifteen years old. She later married Demetrius II, and later still,
his brother Antiochus VII. The year one hundred and sixty-two: 151/150 B.C.
5
 [67] The year one hundred and
sixty-five: 147 B.C. Demetrius: Demetrius II Nicator.
6
 [76] Joppa: about forty miles
northwest of Jerusalem. For the first time the Maccabees took possession of a
seaport; nominally it was on behalf of King Alexander.
7
 [89] Kinsmen: a class higher than
Chief Friends.