1
[1]
 In the year one hundred and seventy-two, King
Demetrius assembled his army and marched into Media to obtain help so that he
could fight Trypho. 
2
[2]
 When Arsaces, king of Persia and Media, heard
that Demetrius had invaded his territory, he sent one of his generals to take
him alive. 
3
The general went forth and defeated the army of
Demetrius; he captured him and brought him to Arsaces, who put him in prison. 
4
The land was at rest all the days of Simon, who
sought the good of his nation. His people were delighted with his power and his
magnificence throughout his reign. 
5
As his crowning glory he captured the port of
Joppa and made it a gateway to the isles of the sea. 
6
He enlarged the borders of his nation and
gained control of the country. 
7
He took many enemies prisoners of war and made
himself master of Gazara, Beth-zur, and the citadel. He cleansed the citadel of
its impurities; there was no one to withstand him. 
8
The people cultivated their land in peace; the
land yielded its produce and the trees of the field their fruit. 
9
Old men sat in the squares, all talking about
the good times, while the young men wore the glorious apparel of war. 
10
He supplied the cities with food and equipped
them with means of defense, till his glorious name reached the ends of the
earth. 
11
He brought peace to the land, and Israel was
filled with happiness. 
12
Every man sat under his vine and his fig tree,
with no one to disturb him. 
13
No one was left to attack them in their land;
the kings in those days were crushed. 
14
He strengthened all the lowly among his people
and was zealous for the law; he suppressed all the lawless and the wicked. 
15
He made the temple splendid and enriched its
equipment. 
16
[3]
 When people heard in Rome and even in Sparta
that Jonathan had died, they were deeply grieved. 
17
But when the Romans heard that his brother
Simon had been made high priest in his place and was master of the country and
the cities, 
18
they sent him inscribed tablets of bronze to
renew with him the friendship and alliance that they had established with his
brothers Judas and Jonathan. 
19
These were read before the assembly in
Jerusalem. 
20
This is a copy of the letter that the Spartans
sent: "The rulers and the citizens of Sparta send greetings to Simon the
high priest, the elders, the priests, and the rest of the Jewish people, our
brothers. 
21
The envoys you sent to our people have informed
us of your glory and fame, and we were happy that they came. 
22
In accordance with what they said we have
recorded the following in the public decrees: Since Numenius, son of Antiochus,
and Antipater, son of Jason, envoys of the Jews, have come to us to renew their
friendship with us, 
23
the people have voted to receive the men with
honor, and to deposit a copy of their words in the public archives, so that the
people of Sparta may have a record of them. A copy of this decree has been made
for Simon the high priest." 
24
After this, Simon sent Numenius to Rome with a
great gold shield weighing a thousand minas, to confirm the alliance with the
Romans. 
25
When the people heard of these things, they
said, "How can we thank Simon and his sons? 
26
He and his brothers and his father's house have
stood firm and repulsed Israel's enemies. They have thus preserved its
liberty." So they made an inscription on bronze tablets, which they
affixed to pillars on Mount Zion. 
27
[4]
 The following is a copy of the inscription:
"On the eighteenth day of Elul, in the year one hundred and seventy-two,
that is, the third year under Simon the high priest in Asaramel, 
28
in a great assembly of priests, people, rulers
of the nation, and elders of the country, the following proclamation was made: 
29
"'Since there have often been wars in our
country, Simon, son of the priest Mattathias, descendant of Joarib, and his
brothers have put themselves in danger and resisted the enemies of their
nation, so that their sanctuary and law might be maintained, and they have thus
brought great glory to their nation. 
30
After Jonathan had rallied his nation and
become their high priest, he was gathered to his kinsmen. 
31
When the enemies of the Jews sought to invade
and devastate their country and to lay hands on their temple, 
32
Simon rose up and fought for his nation,
spending large sums of his own money to equip the men of his nation's armed
forces and giving them their pay. 
33
He fortified the cities of Judea, especially
the frontier city of Beth-zur, where he stationed a garrison of Jewish
soldiers, and where previously the enemy's arms had been stored. 
34
He also fortified Joppa by the sea and Gazara
on the border of Azotus, a place previously occupied by the enemy; these cities
he resettled with Jews, and furnished them with all that was necessary for
their restoration. 
35
When the Jewish people saw Simon's loyalty and
the glory he planned to bring to his nation, they made him their leader and
high priest because of all he had accomplished and the loyalty and justice he
had shown his nation. In every way he sought to exalt his people. 
36
"'In his time and under his guidance they
succeeded in driving the Gentiles out of their country, especially those in the
City of David in Jerusalem, who had built for themselves a citadel from which
they used to sally forth to defile the environs of the temple and inflict grave
injury on its purity. 
37
In this citadel he stationed Jewish soldiers,
and he strengthened its fortifications for the defense of the land and the
city, while he also raised the wall of Jerusalem to a greater height. 
38
Consequently, King Demetrius confirmed him in
the high priesthood, 
39
made him one of his Friends, and conferred the
highest honors on him. 
40
He had indeed heard that the Romans had
addressed the Jews as friends, allies, and brothers and that they had received
Simon's envoys with honor. 
41
"'The Jewish people and their priest have,
therefore, made the following decisions. Simon shall be their permanent leader
and high priest until a true prophet arises. 
42
He shall act as governor general over them, and
shall have charge of the temple, to make regulations concerning its functions
and concerning the country, its weapons and strongholds, 
43
he shall be obeyed by all. All contracts made
in the country shall be dated by his name. He shall have the right to wear
royal purple and gold ornaments. 
44
It shall not be lawful for any of the people or
priests to nullify any of these decisions, or to contradict the orders given by
him, or to convene an assembly in the country without his consent, to be
clothed in royal purple or wear an official gold brooch. 
45
Whoever acts otherwise or violates any of these
prescriptions shall be liable to punishment. 
46
"'All the people approved of granting
Simon the right to act in accord with these decisions, 
47
[5]
 and Simon accepted and agreed to act as high
priest, governor general, and ethnarch of the Jewish people and priests and to
exercise supreme authority over all.'" 
48
It was decreed that this inscription should be
engraved on bronze tablets, to be set up in a conspicuous place in the
precincts of the temple, 
49
and that copies of it should be deposited in
the treasury, where they would be available to Simon and his sons. 
1
 [1] The year one hundred and
seventy-two: 141-140 B.C. The expedition began most probably in the spring of
140. 
2
 [2] Arsaces: Arsaces VI, also
called Mithridates I, the Parthian king (171-138 B.C.). Parthians had overrun
Persia and now held Babylonia, both of which had hitherto belonged to the
Seleucid empire. The Greeks and Macedonians in these countries had appealed to
Demetrius for help.
3
 [16] The embassy to Rome and Sparta
was sent soon after Simon's accession to power, and the replies were received
before Demetrius' expedition (
⇒
 1 Macc 14:1-3) -
probably in 142 B.C.
4
 [27] Eighteenth day of Elul:
September 13, 140 B.C. Asaramel: a Hebrew name meaning "court of the
people of God."
5
 [47] Ethnarch: a subaltern ruler
over a racial group whose office needed confirmation by a higher authority
within the empire.