1
John then went up from Gazara and told his
father Simon what Cendebeus was doing. 
2
Simon called his two oldest sons, Judas and
John, and said to them: "I and my brothers and my father's house have
fought the battles of Israel from our youth until today, and many times we
succeeded in saving Israel. 
3
I have now grown old, but you, by the mercy of
Heaven, have come to man's estate. Take my place and my brother's, and go out
and fight for our nation; and may the help of Heaven be with you!" 
4
John then mustered in the land twenty thousand
warriors and horsemen. Setting out against Cendebeus, they spent the night at
Modein, 
5
rose early, and marched into the plain. There,
facing them, was an immense army of foot soldiers and horsemen, and between the
two armies was a stream. 
6
John and his men took their position against
the enemy. Seeing that his men were afraid to cross the stream, John crossed
first. When his men saw this, they crossed over after him. 
7
Then he divided his infantry into two corps and
put his cavalry between them, for the enemy's horsemen were very numerous. 
8
They blew the trumpets, and Cendebeus and his
army were put to flight; many of them fell wounded, and the rest fled toward
the stronghold. 
9
It was then that John's brother Judas fell
wounded; but John pursued them until Cendebeus reached Kedron, which he had
fortified. 
10
Some took refuge in the towers on the plain of
Azotus, but John set fire to these, and about two thousand of the enemy
perished. He then returned to Judea in peace. 
11
Ptolemy, son of Abubus, had been appointed
governor of the plain of Jericho, and he had much silver and gold, 
12
being the son-in-law of the high priest. 
13
But he became ambitious and sought to get
control of the country. So he made treacherous plans to do away with Simon and
his sons. 
14
[1]
 As Simon was inspecting the cities of the
country and providing for their needs, he and his sons Mattathias and Judas
went down to Jericho in the year one hundred and seventy-seven, in the eleventh
month (that is, the month Shebat). 
15
[2]
 The son of Abubus gave them a deceitful
welcome in the little stronghold called Dok which he had built. While serving
them a sumptuous banquet, he had his men hidden there. 
16
Then, when Simon and his sons had drunk freely,
Ptolemy and his men sprang up, weapons in hand, rushed upon Simon in the
banquet hall, and killed him, his two sons, and some of his servants. 
17
By this vicious act of treason he repaid good
with evil. 
18
Then Ptolemy wrote an account of this and sent
it to the king, asking that troops be sent to help him and that the country be
turned over to him. 
19
He sent other men to Gazara to do away with
John. To the army officers he sent letters inviting them to come to him so that
he might present them with silver, gold, and gifts. 
20
He also sent others to seize Jerusalem and the
mount of the temple. 
21
But someone ran ahead and brought word to John
at Gazara that his father and his brothers had perished, and that Ptolemy had
sent men to kill him also. 
22
On hearing this, John was utterly astounded.
When the men came to kill him, he had them arrested and put to death, for he
knew what they meant to do. 
23
[3]
 Now the rest of the history of John, his wars
and the brave deeds he performed, his rebuilding of the walls, and his other
achievements - 
24
these things are recorded in the chronicle of
his pontificate, from the time that he succeeded his father as high priest. 
1
 [14] In the year one hundred and
seventy-seven, in the eleventh month: January-February, 134 B.C., by the temple
calendar. 
2
 [15] Dok: a fortress built on a
cliff three miles northwest of Jericho, near modern Ain Duq.
3
 [23-24] John Hyrcanus was ruler and
high priest from 134 B.C. till his death in 104 B.C. These verses suggest that
the book was written, or at least completed, only after he died.