1
When Jonathan saw that the times favored him,
he sent selected men to Rome to confirm and renew his friendship with the
Romans. 
2
He also sent letters to Sparta and other places
for the same purpose. 
3
After reaching Rome, the men entered the senate
chamber and said, "The high priest Jonathan and the Jewish people have
sent us to renew the earlier friendship and alliance between you and
them." 
4
The Romans gave them letters addressed to the
authorities in the various places, requesting them to provide the envoys with
safe conduct to the land of Judah. 
5
This is a copy of the letter that Jonathan
wrote to the Spartans: 
6
"Jonathan the high priest, the senate of
the nation, the priests, and the rest of the Jewish people send greetings to
their brothers the Spartans. 
7
[1]
 Long ago a letter was sent to the high priest
Onias from Arius, who then reigned over you, stating that you are our brothers,
as the attached copy shows. 
8
Onias welcomed the envoy with honor and
received the letter, which clearly referred to alliance and friendship. 
9
[2]
 Though we have no need of these things, since
we have for our encouragement the sacred books that are in our possession, 
10
we have ventured to send word to you for the
renewal of brotherhood and friendship, so as not to become strangers to you
altogether; a long time has passed since your mission to us. 
11
We, on our part, have never ceased to remember
you in the sacrifices and prayers that we offer on our feasts and other
appropriate days, as it is right and proper to remember brothers. 
12
We likewise rejoice in your renown. 
13
But many hardships and wars have beset us, and
the kings around us have attacked us. 
14
We did not wish to be troublesome to you and to
the rest of our allies and friends in these wars; 
15
with the help of Heaven for our support, we
have been saved from our enemies, and they have been humbled. 
16
So we have chosen Numenius, son of Antiochus,
and Antipater, son of Jason, and we have sent them to the Romans to renew our
former friendship and alliance with them. 
17
We have also ordered them to come to you and
greet you, and to deliver to you our letter about the renewal of our
brotherhood. 
18
Therefore kindly send us an answer on this
matter." 
19
This is a copy of the letter that was sent to
Onias: 
20
"Arius, king of the Spartans, sends
greetings to Onias the high priest. 
21
A document has been found stating that the
Spartans and the Jews are brothers; both nations descended from Abraham. 
22
Now that we have learned this, kindly write to
us about your welfare. 
23
We, on our part, are informing you that your
cattle and your possessions are ours, and ours are yours. We have, therefore,
given orders that you should be told of this." 
24
Jonathan heard that the generals of Demetrius
had returned to attack him with a stronger army than before. 
25
[3]
 He set out from Jerusalem and went into the
country of Hamath to meet them, giving them no time to enter his province. 
26
The spies he had sent into their camp came back
and reported that the enemy had made ready to attack the Jews that very night. 
27
Therefore, when the sun set, Jonathan ordered
his men to be on guard and to remain armed, ready for combat, throughout the
night. He also set outposts all around the camp. 
28
When the enemy heard that Jonathan and his men
were ready for battle, their hearts sank with fear and dread. They lighted
fires and then withdrew. 
29
But because Jonathan and his men were watching
the lights burning, they did not know what had happened until morning. 
30
Then Jonathan pursued them, but he could not
overtake them, for they had crossed the river Eleutherus. 
31
So Jonathan turned aside against the Arabs who
are called Zabadeans, overwhelming and plundering them. 
32
Then he marched on to Damascus and traversed
that whole region. 
33
Simon also set out and went as far as Ashkalon
and its neighboring strongholds. He then turned to Joppa and occupied it, 
34
for he heard that its men had intended to hand
over this stronghold to the supporters of Demetrius. He left a garrison there
to guard it. 
35
When Jonathan returned, he assembled the elders
of the people, and with them he made plans for building strongholds in Judea, 
36
for making the walls of Jerusalem still higher,
and for erecting a high barrier between the citadel and the city, that would
isolate the citadel and so prevent its garrison from commerce with the city. 
37
The people therefore worked together on
building up the city, for part of the east wall above the ravine had collapsed.
The quarter called Chaphenatha was also repaired. 
38
Simon likewise built up Adida in the Shephelah,
and strengthened its fortifications by providing them with gates and bars. 
39
Trypho was determined to become king of Asia,
assume the crown, and do away with King Antiochus. 
40
But he was afraid that Jonathan would not
permit him, but would fight against him. Looking for a way to seize and kill
him, he set out and reached Beth-shan. 
41
Jonathan marched out against him with forty
thousand picked fighting men and came to Beth-shan. 
42
But when Trypho saw that Jonathan had arrived
with a large army he was afraid to offer him violence. 
43
Instead, he received him with honor, introduced
him to all his friends, and gave him presents. He also ordered his friends and
soldiers to obey him as they would himself. 
44
Then he said to Jonathan: "Why have you
put all your soldiers to so much trouble when we are not at war? 
45
Pick out a few men to stay with you, send the
rest back home, and then come with me to Ptolemais. I will hand it over to you
together with other strongholds and their garrisons, as well as the officials,
then I will leave and go home. That is why I came here." 
46
Jonathan believed him and did as he said. He
dismissed his troops, and they returned to the land of Judah. 
47
But he kept with him three thousand men, of
whom he sent two thousand to Galilee while one thousand accompanied him. 
48
Then as soon as Jonathan had entered Ptolemais,
the men of the city closed the gates and seized him; all who had entered with
him, they killed with the sword. 
49
[4]
 Trypho sent soldiers and cavalry to Galilee
and the Great Plain to destroy all Jonathan's men. 
50
These, upon learning that Jonathan had been
captured and his companions killed, encouraged one another and went out in
compact body ready to fight. 
51
As their pursuers saw that they were ready to
fight for their lives, they turned back. 
52
Thus all these men of Jonathan came safely into
the land of Judah. They mourned over Jonathan and his men, and were in great
fear, and all Israel fell into deep mourning. 
53
All the nations round about sought to destroy
them. They said, "Now that they have no leader to help them, let us make
war on them and wipe out their memory from among men." 
1
 [7] Onias: Onias I, high priest
from 323-300 or 290 B.C. Arius: Arius I, king from 309 to 265 B.C. The letter
was sent long ago, i.e., a century and a half before. 
2
 [9] The sacred books . . . in our
possession: a reference to "the law, the prophets and other books,"
as mentioned in the Prologue to Sirach (
⇒
 1 Macc
12:1), after 132 B.C.
3
 [25] Country of Hamath: the
Seleucid territory of Upper Syria northeast of Coelesyria and separated from it
by the Eleutherus River. The latter territory was under the command of Jonathan
(
⇒
 1 Macc 11:59,
⇒
 60).
4
 [49] The Great Plain: of Beth-shan
(
⇒
 1 Macc 12:41), where Jonathan's disbanded
troops remained.