Introduction
Introduction
The Book of
Judith is a vivid story relating how, in a grave crisis, God delivered the
Jewish people through the instrumentality of a woman. The unknown author
composed this edifying narrative of divine providence at the end of the second
or the beginning of the first century B.C. The original was almost certainly
written in Hebrew, but the Greek text shows so much freedom in adapting from
the Septuagint the language of older biblical books that it must be regarded as
having a literary character of its own. It is this Greek form of the book,
accepted as canonical by the Catholic Church, which is translated here. St.
Jerome, who prepared (with some reluctance) a Latin text of Judith, based his
work on a secondary Aramaic text available to him in Palestine, combined with
an older Latin rendering from the Greek. The long hymn of Jdt 16 he took in its
entirety from that earlier Latin text.
Since it is no longer
possible to determine with any precision the underlying events which may have
given rise to this narrative, it is enough to note that the author sought to
strengthen the faith of his people in God's abiding presence among them. The
Book of Judith is a tract for difficult times; the reader, it was hoped, would
take to heart the lesson that God was still the Master of history, who could
save Israel from her enemies. Note the parallel with the time of the Exodus: as
God had delivered his people by the hand of Moses, so he could deliver them by
the hand of the pious widow Judith (see note on 
⇒
2:12).
The story can be divided
into two parts. In the first (Jdt 1-7), Holofernes, commander-in-chief of the
armies of Nebuchadnezzar, leads an overwhelming Assyrian force in a punitive
campaign against the vassals who refused to help in the Assyrian war against
the Medes. The Jewish people stubbornly resist the enemy at Bethulia, guarding
the route of access to Jerusalem. Despite the warning of Achior that the Jews
cannot be conquered unless they sin against God, the proud general lays siege
to the town and cuts off its water supply. After asiege of thirty-four days,
the exhausted defenders are desperate and ready to surrender.
At this point, the climax
of the story, Judith (the name means "Jewess") appears and promises
to defeat the Assyrians. The rest of the story is too well known to repeat in
detail. Having fasted and prayed, Judith dresses in her finest garments and
proceeds to the Assyrian camp, where she succeeds in killing Holofernes while
he lies in a drunken stupor. The Assyrians panic when they discover this, and
the Jews are able to rout and slaughter them. The beautiful hymn of the people
honoring Judith (
⇒
 Judith 15:9-10) is often applied
to Mary in the liturgy.
Any attempt to read the
book directly against the backdrop of Jewish history in relation to the empires
of the ancient world is bound to fail. The story was written as a pious
reflection on the meaning of the yearly Passover observance. It draws its
inspiration from the Exodus narrative (especially 
⇒
 Exodus
14:31) and from the texts of Isaiah and the Psalms portraying the
special intervention of God for the preservation of Jerusalem. The theme of
God's hand as the agent of this providential activity, reflected of old in the
hand of Moses and now in the hand of Judith, is again exemplified at a later
time in Jewish synagogue art. God's hand reaching down from heaven appears as
part of the scene at Dura-Europos (before A.D. 256) in paintings of the Exodus,
of the sacrifice of Isaac (Gen 22), and of Ezekiel's valley of dry bones (Eze
37).
The Book of Judith is
divided as follows:
I.          
Peril
of the Jews (
⇒
1:1-
⇒
 7:32) 
II.          
Deliverance
of the Jews (
⇒
8:1-
⇒
 14:10) 
III.          
Victory
(
⇒
 Judith 14:11-
⇒
 16:25)