1
On hearing what had happened, those still in
their tents were amazed, 
2
and overcome with fear and trembling. No one
kept ranks any longer; they scattered in all directions, and fled along every
road, both through the valley and in the mountains. 
3
Those also who were stationed in the mountain
district around Bethulia took to flight. Then all the Israelite warriors
overwhelmed them. 
4
Uzziah sent messengers to Betomasthaim, to
Choba and Kona, and to the whole country of Israel to report what had happened,
that all might fall upon the enemy and destroy them. 
5
On hearing this, all the Israelites, with one
accord, attacked them and cut them down as far as Choba. Even those from
Jerusalem and the rest of the mountain region took part in this, for they too
had been notified of the happenings in the camp of their enemies. The
Gileadites and the Galileans struck the enemy's flanks with great slaughter,
even beyond Damascus and its territory. 
6
The remaining inhabitants of Bethulia swept
down on the camp of the Assyrians, plundered it, and acquired great riches. 
7
The Israelites who returned from the slaughter
took possession of what was left, till the towns and villages in the mountains
and on the plain were crammed with the enormous quantity of booty they had
seized. 
8
The high priest Joakim and the elders of the
Israelites, who dwelt in Jerusalem, came to see for themselves the good things
that the Lord had done for Israel, and to meet and congratulate Judith. 
9
[1]
 When they had visited her, all with one accord
blessed her, saying: "You are the glory of Jerusalem, the surpassing joy
of Israel; You are the splendid boast of our people. 
10
With your own hand you have done all this; You
have done good to Israel, and God is pleased with what you have wrought. May
you be blessed by the Lord Almighty forever and ever!" And all the people
answered, "Amen!" 
11
For thirty days the whole populace plundered the
camp, giving Judith the tent of Holofernes, with all his silver, his couches,
his dishes, and all his furniture, which she accepted. She harnessed her mules,
hitched her wagons to them, and loaded these things on them. 
12
All the women of Israel gathered to see her;
and they blessed her and performed a dance in her honor. She took branches in
her hands and distributed them to the women around her, 
13
and she and the other women crowned themselves
with garlands of olive leaves. At the head of all the people, she led the women
in the dance, while the men of Israel followed in their armor, wearing garlands
and singing hymns. 
14
Judith led all Israel in this song of
thanksgiving, and the people swelled this hymn of praise: 
1
 [9] You are the glory of Jerusalem,
the surpassing joy of Israel; you are the splendid boast of our people: these
words are used in the liturgy of the church in regard to the Blessed Virgin
Mary. 