1
Then Judith said to them: "Listen to me,
my brothers. Take this head and hang it on the parapet of your wall. 
2
At daybreak, when the sun rises on the earth,
let each of you seize his weapons, and let all the able-bodied men rush out of
the city under command of a captain, as if about to go down into the plain
against the advance guard of the Assyrians, but without going down. 
3
They will seize their armor and hurry to their
camp to awaken the generals of the Assyrian army. When they run to the tent of
Holofernes and do not find him, panic will seize them, and they will flee
before you. 
4
Then you and all the other inhabitants of the whole
territory of Israel will pursue them and strike them down in their tracks. 
5
But before doing this, summon for me Achior the
Ammonite, that he may see and recognize the one who despised the house of
Israel and sent him here to meet his death." 
6
[1]
 So they called Achior from the house of
Uzziah. When he came and saw the head of Holofernes in the hand of one of the
men in the assembly of the people, he fell forward in a faint. 
7
Then, after they lifted him up, he threw
himself at the feet of Judith in homage, saying: "Blessed are you in every
tent of Judah; and in every foreign nation, all who hear of you will be struck
with terror. 
8
But now, tell me all that you did during these
days." So Judith told him, in the presence of the people, all that she had
been doing from the day she left till the time she began speaking to them. 
9
When she finished her account, the people
cheered loudly, and their city resounded with shouts of joy. 
10
Now Achior, seeing all that the God of Israel
had done, believed firmly in him. He had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised,
and he has been united with the house of Israel to the present day. 
11
At daybreak they hung the head of Holofernes on
the wall. Then all the Israelite men took up their arms and went to the slopes
of the mountain. 
12
When the Assyrians saw them, they notified
their captains; these, in turn, went to the generals and division leaders and
all their other commanders. 
13
They came to the tent of Holofernes and said to
the one in charge of all his things, "Waken our master, for the slaves
have dared come down to give us battle, to their utter destruction." 
14
Bagoas went in, and knocked at the entry of the
tent, presuming that he was sleeping with Judith. 
15
As no one answered, he parted the curtains,
entered the bedroom, and found him lying on the floor, a headless corpse. 
16
He broke into a loud clamor of weeping,
groaning, and howling, and rent his garments. 
17
Then he entered the tent where Judith had her
quarters; and, not finding her, he rushed out to the troops and cried: 
18
"The slaves have duped us! A single Hebrew
woman has brought disgrace on the house of King Nebuchadnezzar. Here is
Holofernes headless on the ground!" 
19
When the commanders of the Assyrian army heard these
words, they rent their tunics and were seized with consternation. Loud
screaming and howling arose in the camp. 
1
 [6] (6-10) In recognizing the head
of Holofernes, whom he had known personally, Achior was so overcome with the
evidence of the Lord's power exerted through a woman that he believed in the
God of Israel. 