1
The following day Holofernes ordered his whole
army, and all the allied troops that had come to his support, to move against
Bethulia, seize the mountain passes, and engage the Israelites in battle. 
2
That same day all their fighting men went into
action. Their forces numbered a hundred and seventy thousand infantry and
twelve thousand horsemen, not counting the baggage train or the men who
accompanied it on foot - a very great army. 
3
They encamped at the spring in the valley near
Bethulia, and spread out in breadth toward Dothan as far as Balbaim, and in
length from Bethulia to Cyamon, which faces Esdraelon. 
4
When the Israelites saw how many there were,
they said to one another in great dismay: "Soon they will devour the whole
country. Neither the high mountains nor the valleys and hills can support the
mass of them." 
5
[1]
 Yet they all seized their weapons, lighted
fires on their bastions, and kept watch throughout the night. 
6
On the second day Holofernes led out all his
cavalry in the sight of the Israelites who were in Bethulia. 
7
He reconnoitered the approaches to their city
and located their sources of water; these he seized, stationing armed
detachments around them, while he himself returned to his troops. 
8
All the commanders of the Edomites and all the
leaders of the Ammonites, together with the generals of the seacoast, came to
Holofernes and said: 
9
"Sir, listen to what we have to say, that
there may be no losses among your troops. 
10
These Israelites do not rely on their spears,
but on the height of the mountains where they dwell; it is not easy to reach
the summit of their mountains. 
11
Therefore, sir, do not attack them in regular
formation; thus not a single one of your troops will fall. 
12
Stay in your camp, and spare all your soldiers.
Have some of your servants keep control of the source of water that flows out
at the base of the mountain, 
13
for that is where the inhabitants of Bethulia
get their water. Then thirst will begin to carry them off, and they will
surrender their city. Meanwhile, we and our men will go up to the summits of
the nearby mountains, and encamp there to guard against anyone's leaving the
city. 
14
They and their wives and children will languish
with hunger, and even before the sword strikes them they will be laid low in
the streets of their city. 
15
Thus you will render them dire punishment for
their rebellion and their refusal to meet you peacefully." 
16
Their words pleased Holofernes and all his
ministers, and he ordered their proposal to be carried out. 
17
Thereupon the Moabites moved camp, together
with five thousand Assyrians. They encamped in the valley, and held the water
supply and the springs of the Israelites. 
18
The Edomites and the Ammonites went up and
encamped in the mountain region opposite Dothan; and they sent some of their
men to the south and to the east opposite Egrebel, near Chusi, which is on Wadi
Mochmur. The rest of the Assyrian army was encamped in the plain, covering the
whole countryside. Their enormous store of tents and equipment was spread out
in profusion everywhere. 
19
The Israelites cried to the Lord, their God,
for they were disheartened, since all their enemies had them surrounded, and
there was no way of slipping through their lines. 
20
The whole Assyrian camp, infantry, chariots,
and cavalry, kept them thus surrounded for thirty-four days. All the reservoirs
of water failed the inhabitants of Bethulia, 
21
and the cisterns ran dry, so that on no day did
they have enough to drink, but their drinking water was rationed. 
22
Their children fainted away, and the women and
youths were consumed with thirst and were collapsing in the streets and
gateways of the city, with no strength left in them. 
23
All the people, therefore, including youths,
women, and children, went in a crowd to Uzziah and the rulers of the city. They
set up a great clamor and said before the elders: 
24
"God judge between you and us! You have
done us grave injustice in not making peace with the Assyrians. 
25
There is no help for us now! Instead, God has
sold us into their power by laying us prostrate before them in thirst and utter
exhaustion. 
26
Therefore, summon them and deliver the whole
city as booty to the troops of Holofernes and to all his forces; 
27
we would be better off to become their prey. We
should indeed be made slaves, but at least we should live, and not have to
behold our little ones dying before our eyes and our wives and children
breathing out their souls. 
28
We adjure you by heaven and earth, and by our
God, the Lord of our forefathers, who is punishing us for our sins and those of
our forefathers, to do as we have proposed, this very day." 
29
All in the assembly with one accord broke into
shrill wailing and loud cries to the Lord their God. 
30
But Uzziah said to them, "Courage, my
brothers! Let us wait five days more for the Lord our God, to show his mercy
toward us; he will not utterly forsake us. 
31
But if those days pass without help coming to
us, I will do as you say." 
32
Then he dispersed the men to their posts, and
they returned to the walls and towers of the city; the women and children he
sent to their homes. Throughout the city they were in great misery. 
1
 [5] Lighted fires on their
bastions: to serve as signals for alerting the neighboring towns. Reference to
fire signals in time of siege is made in the Lachish ostraca at the beginning
of the sixth century B.C. Kept watch throughout the night: to prevent a surprise
attack. 