1
Judith threw herself down prostrate, with ashes
strewn upon her head, and wearing nothing over her sackcloth. While the incense
was being offered in the temple of God in Jerusalem that evening, Judith prayed
to the Lord with a loud voice: 
2
[1]
 "Lord, God of my forefather Simeon! You
put a sword into his hand to take revenge upon the foreigners who had immodestly
loosened the maiden's girdle, shamefully exposed her thighs, and disgracefully
violated her body. This they did, though you forbade it. 
3
[2]
 Therefore you had their rulers slaughtered;
and you covered with their blood the bed in which they lay deceived, the same
bed that had felt the shame of their own deceiving. You smote the slaves
together with their princes, and the princes together with their servants. 
4
Their wives you handed over to plunder, and their
daughters to captivity; and all the spoils you divided among your favored sons,
who burned with zeal for you, and in their abhorrence of the defilement of
their kinswoman, called on you for help. 
5
"O God, my God, hear me also, a widow. It
is you who were the author of those events and of what preceded and followed
them. The present, also, and the future you have planned. Whatever you devise
comes into being; 
6
the things you decide on come forward and say,
'Here we are!' All your ways are in readiness, and your judgment is made with
foreknowledge. 
7
"Here are the Assyrians, a vast force,
priding themselves on horse and rider, boasting of the power of their infantry,
trusting in shield and spear, bow and sling. They do not know that 
8
" 'You, the Lord, crush warfare; Lord is
your name. Shatter their strength in your might, and crush their force in your
wrath; for they have resolved to profane your sanctuary, to defile the tent
where your glorious name resides, and to overthrow with iron the horns of your
altar. 
9
See their pride, and send forth your wrath upon
their heads. Give me, a widow, the strong hand to execute my plan. 
10
With the guile of my lips, smite the slave
together with the ruler, the ruler together with his servant; crush their pride
by the hand of a woman. 
11
"Your strength is not in numbers, nor does
your power depend upon stalwart men; but you are the God of the lowly, the
helper of the oppressed, the supporter of the weak, the protector of the
forsaken, the savior of those without hope. 
12
"Please, please, God of my forefather, God
of the heritage of Israel, Lord of heaven and earth, Creator of the waters,
King of all you have created, hear my prayer! 
13
Let my guileful speech bring wound and wale on
those who have planned dire things against your covenant, your holy temple,
Mount Zion, and the homes your children have inherited. 
14
Let your whole nation and all the tribes know
clearly that you are the god of all power and might, and that there is no other
who protects the people of Israel but you alone." 
1
 [2] The maiden: Dinah, Jacob's
daughter, who was violated by Shechem, the Hivite (
⇒
 Genesis
34:2). 
2
 [3] Because Shechem had deceived
and violated Dinah, her brothers, Simeon and Levi, tricked Shechem and the men
of his city into being circumcised, and then slew them while they were confined
to bed from the circumcision; cf 
⇒
 Genesis
34:13-29.