1
Then Holofernes said to her: "Take
courage, lady; have no fear in your heart! Never have I harmed anyone who chose
to serve Nebuchadnezzar, king of all the earth. 
2
Nor would I have raised my spear against your
people who dwell in the mountain region, had they not despised me and brought
this upon themselves. 
3
But now tell me why you fled from them and came
to us. In any case, you have come to safety. Take courage! Your life is spared tonight
and for the future. 
4
No one at all will harm you. Rather, you will
be well treated, as are all the servants of my lord, King Nebuchadnezzar."
5
Judith answered him: "Listen to the words
of your servant, and let your handmaid speak in your presence! I will tell no
lie to my lord this night, 
6
and if you follow out the words of your
handmaid, God will give you complete success, and my lord will not fail in any
of his undertakings. 
7
By the life of Nebuchadnezzar, king of all the
earth, and by the power of him who has sent you to set all creatures aright!
not only do men serve him through you; but even the wild beasts and the cattle
and the birds of the air, because of your strength, will live for
Nebuchadnezzar and his whole house. 
8
Indeed, we have heard of your wisdom and
sagacity, and all the world is aware that throughout the kingdom you alone are
competent, rich in experience, and distinguished in military strategy. 
9
"As for Achior's speech in your council,
we have heard of it. When the men of Bethulia spared him, he told them all he
had said to you. 
10
So then, my lord and master, do not disregard
his word, but bear it in mind, for it is true. For our people are not punished,
nor does the sword prevail against them, except when they sin against their
God. 
11
But now their guilt has caught up with them, by
which they bring the wrath of their God upon them whenever they do wrong; so
that my lord will not be repulsed and fail, but death will overtake them. 
12
Since their food gave out and all their water
ran low, they decided to kill their animals, and determined to consume all the
things which God in his laws forbade them to eat. 
13
They decreed that they would use up the first
fruits of grain and the tithes of wine and oil which they had sanctified and
reserved for the priests who minister in the presence of our God in Jerusalem:
things which no layman should even touch with his hands. 
14
They have sent messengers to Jerusalem to bring
back to them authorization from the council of the elders; for the inhabitants
there have also done these things. 
15
On the very day when the response reaches them
and they act upon it, they will be handed over to you for destruction. 
16
"As soon as I, your handmaid, learned all
this, I fled from them. God has sent me to perform with you such deeds that
people throughout the world will be astonished on hearing of them. 
17
Your handmaid is, indeed, a God-fearing woman,
serving the God of heaven night and day. Now I will remain with you, my lord; but
each night your handmaid will go out to the ravine and pray to God. He will
tell me when the Israelites have committed their crimes. 
18
Then I will come and let you know, so that you
may go out with your whole force, and not one of them will be able to withstand
you. 
19
I will lead you through Judea, till you come to
Jerusalem, and there I will set up your judgment seat. You will drive them like
sheep that have no shepherd, and not even a dog will growl at you. This was
told me, and announced to me in advance, and I in turn have been sent to tell
you." 
20
Her words pleased Holofernes and all his
servants; they marveled at her wisdom and exclaimed, 
21
"No other woman from one end of the world
to the other looks so beautiful and speaks so wisely!" 
22
Then Holofernes said to her: "God has done
well in sending you ahead of your people, to bring victory to our arms, and
destruction to those who have despised my lord. 
23
You are fair to behold, and your words are well
spoken. If you do as you have said, your God will be my God; you shall dwell in
the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar, and shall be renowned throughout the
earth." 