1
In the eighteenth year, on the twenty-second day
of the first month, there was a discussion in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar,
king of the Assyrians, about taking revenge on the whole world, as he had
threatened. 
2
He summoned all his ministers and nobles, laid
before them his secret plan, and urged the total destruction of those
countries. 
3
They decided to do away with all those who had
refused to comply with the order he had issued. 
4
When he had completed his plan, Nebuchadnezzar,
king of the Assyrians, summoned Holofernes, general in chief of his forces,
second to himself in command, and said to him: 
5
"Thus says the great king, the lord of all
the earth: Go forth from my presence, take with you men of proven valor, a
hundred and twenty thousand infantry and twelve thousand cavalry, 
6
and proceed against all the land of the West,
because they did not comply with the order I issued. 
7
[1]
 Tell them to have earth and water ready, for I
will come against them in my wrath; I will cover all the land with the feet of
my soldiers, to whom I will deliver them as spoils. 
8
Their slain shall fill their ravines and
wadies, the swelling torrent shall be choked with their dead; 9 and I will
deport them as exiles to the very ends of the earth. 
10
"You go before me and take possession of
all their territories for me. If they surrender to you, guard them for me till
the day of their punishment. 
11
As for those who resist, show them no quarter,
but deliver them up to slaughter and plunder in each country you occupy. 
12
[2]
 For as I live, and by the strength of my
kingdom, what I have spoken I will accomplish by my power. 
13
Do not disobey a single one of the orders of
your lord; fulfill them exactly as I have commanded you, and do it without
delay." 
14
So Holofernes left the presence of his lord, and
summoned all the princes, and the generals and officers of the Assyrian army. 
15
He mustered a hundred and twenty thousand
picked troops, as his lord had commanded, and twelve thousand mounted archers, 
16
and grouped them into a complete combat force. 
17
He took along a very large number of camels,
asses, and mules for their baggage; innumerable sheep, cattle, and goats for
their food supply; 
18
abundant provisions for each man, and much gold
and silver from the royal palace. 
19
Then he and his whole army proceeded on their
expedition in advance of King Nebuchadnezzar, to cover all the western region
with their chariots and cavalry and regular infantry. 
20
A huge, irregular force, too many to count,
like locusts or the dust of the earth, went along with them. 
21
After a three-day march from Nineveh, they
reached the plain of Bectileth, and from Bectileth they next encamped near the
mountains to the north of Upper Cilicia. 
22
From there Holofernes took his whole force, the
infantry, cavalry, and chariots, and marched into the mountain region. 
23
[3]
 He devastated Put and Lud, and plundered all
the Rassisites and the Ishmaelites on the border of the desert toward the south
of Chaldea. 
24
Then, following the Euphrates, he went through
Mesopotamia, and battered down every fortified city along the Wadi Abron, until
he reached the sea. 
25
He seized the territory of Cilicia, and cut
down everyone who resisted him. Then he proceeded to the southern borders of
Japheth, toward Arabia. 
26
He surrounded all the Midianites, burned their
tents, and plundered their sheepfolds. 
27
Descending to the plain of Damascus at the time
of the wheat harvest, he set fire to all their fields, destroyed their flocks
and herds, despoiled their cities, devastated their plains, and put all their
youths to the sword. 
28
The fear and dread of him fell upon all the
inhabitants of the coastland, upon those in Sidon and Tyre, and those who dwelt
in Sur and Ocina, and the inhabitants of Jamnia. Those in Azotus and Ascalon
also feared him greatly. 
1
 [7] Earth and water: in the Persian
period, the offering of these to a conqueror was a symbolic gesture of
unconditional surrender. 
2
 [12] As I live: in the Old
Testament, an oath proper to divinity; cf 
⇒
 Deut
32:40. Nebuchadnezzar is making himself equal to God; see
⇒
 Judith 6:2. By my power: literally "by my
hand." The hand of Nebuchadnezzar raised in opposition to God and to his
people is the occasion for Judith's intervention by a woman's hand; cf
⇒
 Judith 9:9, 
⇒
 10;
⇒
 Isaiah 10:5-14.
3
 [23] Put and Lud: the same as the
"Put and Lud" mentioned in 
⇒
 Ezekiel 30:5
as allies of Egypt, and in 
⇒
 Ezekiel 27:10 as
supplying mercenary soldiers to Tyre. Here they seem inserted to embellish the
narrative with assonance and prophetic associations rather than to indicate
definite localities.