1
It was reported to Holofernes,
commander-in-chief of the Assyrian army, that the Israelites were ready for
battle, and had blocked the mountain passes, fortified the summits of all the
higher peaks, and placed roadblocks in the plains. 
2
In great anger he summoned all the rulers of
the Moabites, the generals of the Ammonites, and all the satraps of the
seacoast 
3
and said to them: "Now tell me, you
Canaanites, what sort of people is this that dwells in the mountains? Which
cities do they inhabit? How large is their army? In what does their power and
strength consist? Who has set himself up as their king and the leader of their
army? 
4
Why have they refused to come out to meet me
along with all the other inhabitants of the West?" 
5
Then Achior, the leader of all the Ammonites
said to him: "My lord, hear this account from your servant; I will tell
you the truth about this people that lives near you (that inhabits this
mountain region); no lie shall escape your servant's lips. 
6
[1]
 "These people are descendants of the
Chaldeans. 
7
They formerly dwelt in Mesopotamia, for they
did not wish to follow the gods of their forefathers who were born in the land
of the Chaldeans. 
8
Since they abandoned the way of their
ancestors, and acknowledged with divine worship the God of heaven, their
forefathers expelled them from the presence of their gods. So they fled to
Mesopotamia and dwelt there a long time. 
9
Their God bade them leave their abode and
proceed to the land of Canaan. Here they settled, and grew very rich in gold,
silver, and a great abundance of livestock. 
10
Later, when famine had gripped the whole land
of Canaan, they went down into Egypt. They stayed there as long as they found
sustenance, and grew into such a great multitude that the number of their race
could not be counted. 
11
The king of Egypt, however, rose up against them,
shrewdly forced them to labor at brickmaking, oppressed and enslaved them. 
12
But they cried to their God, and he struck the
land of Egypt with plagues for which there was no remedy. When the Egyptians
expelled them, 
13
God dried up the Red Sea before them, 
14
and led them along the route to Sinai and
Kadesh-barnea. First they drove out all the inhabitants of the desert; 
15
then they settled in the land of the Amorites,
destroyed all the Heshbonites by main force, crossed the Jordan, and took
possession of the whole mountain region. 
16
They expelled the Canaanites, the Perizzites,
the Jebusites, the Shechemites, and all the Gergesites; and they lived in these
mountains a long time. 
17
"As long as the Israelites did not sin in
the sight of their God, they prospered, for their God, who hates wickedness,
was with them. 
18
But when they deviated from the way he
prescribed for them, they were ground down steadily, more and more, by frequent
wars, and finally taken as captives into foreign lands. The temple of their God
was razed to the ground, and their cities were occupied by their enemies. 
19
But now that they have returned to their God,
they have come back from the Dispersion wherein they were scattered, and have
repossessed Jerusalem, where their sanctuary is, and have settled again in the
mountain region which was unoccupied. 
20
"So now, my lord and master, if these
people are at fault, and are sinning against their God, and if we verify this
offense of theirs, then we shall be able to go up and conquer them. 
21
But if they are not a guilty nation, then your
lordship should keep his distance; otherwise their Lord and God will shield
them, and we shall become the laughing stock of the whole world." 
22
Now when Achior had concluded his
recommendation, all the people standing round about the tent murmured; and the
officers of Holofernes and all the inhabitants of the seacoast and of Moab
alike said he should be cut to pieces. 
23
"We are not afraid of the
Israelites," they said, "for they are a powerless people, incapable
of a strong defense. 
24
Let us therefore attack them; your great army,
Lord Holofernes, will swallow them up." 
1
 [6] (6-9) Achior outlines the early
history of the Hebrews, whose forefather, Abraham, first lived in Ur of the
Chaldeans (
⇒
 Genesis 11:28) and then migrated to
Haran (
⇒
 Genesis 11:31) in Aram Naharaim
(
⇒
 Genesis 24:10), which was called Mesopotamia by
the Greeks. The gods of their forefathers were the pagan deities worshiped by
Abraham's relatives (
⇒
 Joshua 24:2). 