1
When the noise of the crowd surrounding the
council had subsided, Holofernes, commander-in-chief of the Assyrian army, said
to Achior, in the presence of the whole throng of coastland peoples, of the
Moabites, and of the Ammonite mercenaries: 
2
"Who are you, Achior, to prophesy among us
as you have done today, and to tell us not to fight against the Israelites
because their God protects them? What god is there beside Nebuchadnezzar? He
will send his force and destroy them from the face of the earth. Their God will
not save them; 
3
but we, the servants of Nebuchadnezzar, will
strike them down as one man, for they will be unable to withstand the force of
our cavalry. 
4
We will overwhelm them with it, and the
mountains shall be drunk with their blood, and their plains filled with their
corpses. Not a trace of them shall survive our attack: they shall utterly
perish, says King Nebuchadnezzar, lord of all the earth; for he has spoken, and
his words shall not remain unfulfilled. 
5
As for you, Achior, you Ammonite mercenary, for
saying these things in a moment of perversity you shall not see my face after
today, until I have taken revenge on this race of people from Egypt. 
6
Then at my return, the sword of my army or the
spear of my servants will pierce your sides, and you shall fall among their
slain. 
7
My servants will now conduct you to the
mountain region, and leave you at one of the towns along the ascent. 
8
You shall not die till you are destroyed
together with them. 
9
If you still cherish the hope that they will
not be taken, then there is no need for you to be downcast. I have spoken, and
my words shall not prove false in any respect." 
10
Then Holofernes ordered the servants who were
standing by in his tent to seize Achior, conduct him to Bethulia, and hand him
over to the Israelites. 
11
So the servants took him in custody and brought
him out of the camp into the plain. From there they led him into the mountain
region till they reached the springs below Bethulia. 
12
When the men of the city saw them, they seized
their weapons and ran out of the city to the crest of the ridge; and all the
slingers blocked the ascent of Holofernes' servants by hurling stones upon
them. 
13
So they took cover below the mountain, where
they bound Achior and left him lying at the foot of the mountain; then they
returned to their lord. 
14
The Israelites came down to him from their
city, loosed him, and brought him into Bethulia. They haled him before the
rulers of the city, 
15
who in those days were Uzziah, son of Micah of
the tribe of Simeon, Chabris, son of Gothoniel, and Charmis, son of Melchiel. 
16
They then convened all the elders of the city;
and all their young men, as well as the women, gathered in haste at the place
of assembly. They placed Achior in the center of the throng, and Uzziah
questioned him about what had happened. 
17
He replied by giving them an account of what
was said in the council of Holofernes, and of all his own words among the
Assyrian officers, and of all the boasting threats of Holofernes against the
house of Israel. 
18
At this the people fell prostrate and worshiped
God; and they cried out: 
19
[1]
 "Lord, God of heaven, behold their
arrogance! Have pity on the lowliness of our people, and look with favor this
day on those who are consecrated to you." 
20
Then they reassured Achior and praised him
highly. 
21
Uzziah brought him from the assembly to his
home, where he gave a banquet for the elders. That whole night they called upon
the God of Israel for help. 
1
 [19] The Latin Vulgate
(
⇒
 Judith 6:15) has a longer form of this prayer:
"Lord, God of heaven and earth, behold their arrogance; regard our
lowliness and look with favor on your holy ones; show that you do not abandon
those who trust in you, but that you humble those who trust in themselves and
glory in their own strength." 