1
[1]
 Faith is the realization of what is hoped for
and evidence 
[2]
 of things not seen. 
2
Because of it the ancients were well attested. 
3
By faith we understand that the universe was
ordered by the word of God, 
[3]
 so that what is visible came
into being through the invisible. 
4
[4]
 By faith Abel offered to God a sacrifice greater
than Cain's. Through this he was attested to be righteous, God bearing witness
to his gifts, and through this, though dead, he still speaks. 
5
By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should
not see death, and "he was found no more because God had taken him."
Before he was taken up, he was attested to have pleased God. 
6
[5]
 But without faith it is impossible to please
him, for anyone who approaches God must believe that he exists and that he
rewards those who seek him. 
7
By faith Noah, warned about what was not yet
seen, with reverence built an ark for the salvation of his household. Through
this he condemned the world and inherited the righteousness that comes through
faith. 
8
By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to
go out to a place that he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, not
knowing where he was to go. 
9
By faith he sojourned in the promised land as
in a foreign country, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs of the same
promise; 
10
for he was looking forward to the city with
foundations, whose architect and maker is God. 
11
By faith he received power to generate, even
though he was past the normal age - and Sarah herself was sterile - for he
thought that the one who had made the promise was trustworthy. 
12
So it was that there came forth from one man,
himself as good as dead, descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as
countless as the sands on the seashore. 
13
All these died in faith. They did not receive
what had been promised but saw it and greeted it from afar and acknowledged
themselves to be strangers and aliens on earth, 
14
for those who speak thus show that they are
seeking a homeland. 
15
If they had been thinking of the land from
which they had come, they would have had opportunity to return. 
16
But now they desire a better homeland, a
heavenly one. Therefore, God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has
prepared a city for them. 
17
By faith Abraham, when put to the test, offered
up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was ready to offer his only son,
18
of whom it was said, "Through Isaac
descendants shall bear your name." 
19
[6]
 He reasoned that God was able to raise even
from the dead, and he received Isaac back as a symbol. 
20
By faith regarding things still to come Isaac 
[7]
blessed Jacob and Esau. 
21
By faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the
sons of Joseph and "bowed in worship, leaning on the top of his
staff." 
22
By faith Joseph, near the end of his life,
spoke of the Exodus of the Israelites and gave instructions about his bones. 
23
By faith Moses was hidden by his parents for
three months after his birth, because they saw that he was a beautiful child,
and they were not afraid of the king's edict. 
24
[8]
 By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused
to be known as the son of Pharaoh's daughter; 
25
he chose to be ill-treated along with the
people of God rather than enjoy the fleeting pleasure of sin. 
26
He considered the reproach of the Anointed
greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking to the
recompense. 
27
By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the king's
fury, for he persevered as if seeing the one who is invisible. 
28
By faith he kept the Passover and sprinkled the
blood, that the Destroyer of the firstborn might not touch them. 
29
By faith they crossed the Red Sea as if it were
dry land, but when the Egyptians attempted it they were drowned. 
30
By faith the walls of Jericho fell after being
encircled for seven days. 
31
By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with
the disobedient, for she had received the spies in peace. 
32
What more shall I say? I have not time to tell
of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets, 
33
who by faith conquered kingdoms, did what was righteous,
obtained the promises; they closed the mouths of lions, 
34
put out raging fires, escaped the devouring
sword; out of weakness they were made powerful, became strong in battle, and
turned back foreign invaders. 
35
Women received back their dead through
resurrection. Some were tortured and would not accept deliverance, in order to
obtain a better resurrection. 
36
Others endured mockery, scourging, even chains
and imprisonment. 
37
They were stoned, sawed in two, put to death at
sword's point; they went about in skins of sheep or goats, needy, afflicted,
tormented. 
38
The world was not worthy of them. They wandered
about in deserts and on mountains, in caves and in crevices in the earth. 
39
Yet all these, though approved because of their
faith, did not receive what had been promised. 
40
God had foreseen something better for us, so
that without us they should not be made perfect. 
[9]
1
 [1-40] This chapter draws upon the
people and events of the Old Testament to paint an inspiring portrait of
religious faith, firm and unyielding in the face of any obstacles that confront
it. These pages rank among the most eloquent and lofty to be found in the
Bible. They expand the theme announced in 
⇒
6:12, to which the author now returns (
⇒
10:39). The material of this chapter is developed chronologically.
⇒
 Hebrews 11:3-7 draw upon the first nine chapters
of Genesis (Genesis 1-9); 
⇒
 Hebrews 11:8-22, upon
the period of the patriarchs; 
⇒
 Hebrews 11:23-31,
upon the time of Moses; 
⇒
 Hebrews 11:32-38, upon
the history of the judges, the prophets, and the Maccabean martyrs. The author
gives the most extensive description of faith provided in the New Testament,
though his interest does not lie in a technical, theological definition. In
view of the needs of his audience he describes what authentic faith does, not
what it is in itself. Through faith God guarantees the blessings to be hoped
for from him, providing evidence in the gift of faith that what he promises
will eventually come to pass (
⇒
 Hebrews 11:1).
Because they accepted in faith God's guarantee of the future, the biblical
personages discussed in 
⇒
 Hebrews 11:3-38 were
themselves commended by God (
⇒
 Hebrews 11:2).
Christians have even greater reason to remain firm in faith since they, unlike
the Old Testament men and women of faith, have perceived the beginning of God's
fulfillment of his messianic promises (
⇒
 Hebrews 11:39-40).
2
 [1] Faith is the realization . . .
evidence: the author is not attempting a precise definition. There is dispute
about the meaning of the Greek words hypostasis and elenchos, here translated
realization and evidence, respectively. Hypostasis usually means
"substance," "being" (as translated in
⇒
 Hebrews 1:3), or "reality" (as translated
in 
⇒
 Hebrews 3:14); here it connotes something more
subjective, and so realization has been chosen rather than
"assurance" (RSV). Elenchos, usually "proof," is used here
in an objective sense and so translated evidence rather than the transferred
sense of "(inner) conviction" (RSV). 
3
 [3] By faith . . . God: this verse
does not speak of the faith of the Old Testament men and women but is in the
first person plural. Hence it seems out of place in the sequence of thought.
4
 [4] The "Praise of the
Ancestors" in 
⇒
 Sirach
44:1-
⇒
 50:21 gives a similar list of
heroes. The Cain and Abel narrative in 
⇒
 Genesis
4:1-16 does not mention Abel's faith. It says, however, that God
"looked with favor on Abel and his offering" (Genesis 4, 4); in view
of v 6 the author probably understood God's favor to have been activated by
Abel's faith. Though dead, he still speaks: possibly because his blood
"cries out to me from the soil" (
⇒
 Genesis
4:10), but more probably a way of saying that the repeated story of
Abel provides ongoing witness to faith.
5
 [6] One must believe not only that
God exists but that he is concerned about human conduct; the Old Testament
defines folly as the denial of this truth; cf 
⇒
 Psalm 52:2.
6
 [19] As a symbol: Isaac's
"return from death" is seen as a symbol of Christ's resurrection.
Others understand the words en parabole to mean "in figure," i.e.,
the word dead is used figuratively of Isaac, since he did not really die. But
in the one other place that parabole occurs in Hebrews, it means symbol
(
⇒
 Hebrews 9:9).
7
 [20-22] Each of these three
patriarchs, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, had faith in the future fulfillment of
God's promise and renewed this faith when near death.
8
 [24-27] The reason given for Moses'
departure from Egypt differs from the account in 
⇒
 Exodus
2:11-15. The author also gives a christological interpretation of his
decision to share the trials of his people.
9
 [40] So that without us they should
not be made perfect: the heroes of the Old Testament obtained their recompense
only after the saving work of Christ had been accomplished. Thus they already
enjoy what Christians who are still struggling do not yet possess in its
fullness.