1
Therefore David said, "This is the house
of the LORD God, and this is the altar of holocausts for Israel." 
2
[1]
 David then ordered that all the aliens who
lived in the land of Israel be brought together, and he appointed them
stonecutters to hew out stone blocks for building the house of God. 
3
He also laid up large stores of iron to make
nails for the doors of the gates, and clamps, together with so much bronze that
it could not be weighed, 
4
and cedar trees without number. The Sidonians
and Tyrians brought great stores of cedar logs to David, 
5
who said: "My son Solomon is young and
immature; but the house that is to be built for the LORD must be made so
magnificent that it will be renowned and glorious in all countries. Therefore I
will make preparations for it." Thus before his death David laid up
materials in abundance. 
6
Then he called for his son Solomon and
commanded him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel. 
7
David said to Solomon: "My son, it was my
purpose to build a house myself for the honor of the LORD, my God. 
8
But this word of the LORD came to me: 'You have
shed much blood, and you have waged great wars. You may not build a house in my
honor, because you have shed too much blood upon the earth in my sight. 
9
[2]
 However, a son is to be born to you. He will
be a peaceful man, and I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side.
For Solomon shall be his name, and in his time I will bestow peace and
tranquillity on Israel. 
10
It is he who shall build a house in my honor;
he shall be a son to me, and I will be a father to him, and I will establish
the throne of his kingship over Israel forever.' 
11
Now, my son, the LORD be with you, and may you
succeed in building the house of the LORD your God, as he has said you shall. 
12
May the LORD give you prudence and discernment
when he brings you to rule over Israel, so that you keep the law of the LORD,
your God. 
13
Only then shall you succeed, if you are careful
to observe the precepts and decrees which the LORD gave Moses for Israel. Be
brave and steadfast; do not fear or lose heart. 
14
[3]
 See, with great effort I have laid up for the
house of the LORD a hundred thousand talents of gold, a million talents of
silver, and bronze and iron in such great quantities that they cannot be
weighed. I have also stored up wood and stones, to which you must add. 
15
Moreover, you have available an unlimited
supply of workmen, stonecutters, masons, carpenters, and every kind of craftsman
16
skilled in gold, silver, bronze, and iron. Set
to work, therefore, and the LORD be with you!" 
17
David also commanded all of Israel's leaders to
help his son Solomon: 
18
"Is not the LORD your God with you? Has he
not given you rest on every side? Indeed, he has delivered the occupants of the
land into my power, and the land is subdued before the LORD and his people. 
19
Therefore, devote your hearts and souls to
seeking the LORD your God. Proceed to build the sanctuary of the LORD God, that
the ark of the covenant of the LORD and God's sacred vessels may be brought
into the house built in honor of the LORD." 
1
 [2-4] According to
⇒
 1 Kings 5:15-18,(15-32) it was Solomon who made
the material preparations for building the temple, even though David had wished
to do so (
⇒
 1 Kings 5:17-18[17-29]). The
Chronicler, however, sought to have David, who was Israel's ideal king, more
closely connected with Israel's most sacred sanctuary, the temple of Jerusalem.
2
 [9] The Hebrew word for peace,
shalom, is reflected in the name Solomon, in Hebrew, Shelomo. A contrast is
drawn here between Solomon, the peaceful man, and David, who waged great wars
(
⇒
 1 Chron 22:8). David was prevented from building
the temple, not only because all his time was taken up in waging war
(
⇒
 1 Kings 5:17), but also, because he shed much
blood (
⇒
 1 Chron 22:8), and in the eyes of the
Chronicler this made him ritually unfit for the task.
3
 [14] A hundred thousand talents of
gold: about 3,775 tons of gold. A million talents of silver: about 37,750 tons
of silver. The fantastically exaggerated figures are intended merely to stress
the inestimable value of the temple as the center of Israelite worship. More
modest figures are given in 
⇒
 1 Kings 9:14,
⇒
 28; 
⇒
 10:10,
⇒
 14.