Introduction
Introduction
This letter is
addressed to the same church as the letter that precedes it in the canon and
contains many expressions parallel to those in the First Letter to the
Thessalonians, indeed verbatim with them. Yet other aspects of the contents of
the Second Letter to the Thessalonians suggest a more impersonal tone and
changed circumstances in the situation at Thessalonica.
The letter begins with an
address (
⇒
 2 Thes 1:1-2) that expands only slightly
on that of 
⇒
 1 Thes 1:1. It ends with a greeting
insisting on its Pauline authority in the face of false claims made in Paul's
name (see the note on 
⇒
 2 Thes 2:2). The body of the
letter falls into three short parts, of which the second is notoriously
difficult (2 Thes 2).
The opening thanksgiving
and prayer (
⇒
 2 Thes 1:3-12) speak of the Thessalonians'
increasing faith and love in the face of outside persecution. God's eventual
judgment against persecutors and his salvation for the faithful are already
evidenced by the very fact of persecution. The second part
(
⇒
 2 Thes 2:1-17), the heart of the letter, deals
with a problem threatening the faith of the community. A message involving a
prophetic oracle and apparently a forged letter, possibly presented at a
liturgical gathering (cf 
⇒
 2 Thes 2:2 and
⇒
 1 Cor 14:26-33), to the effect that the day of
the Lord and all that it means have already come, has upset the life of the
Thessalonian church.
The writer counters their
preoccupation with the date of the parousia (or coming again of the Lord Jesus
from heaven, 
⇒
 2 Thes 2:1) by recalling Paul's
teaching concerning what must happen first and by going on to describe what
will happen at the Lord's coming (
⇒
 2 Thes 2:8); he indicates
the twofold process by which the "activity of Satan" and God's
actions (
⇒
 2 Thes 2:9-11) are working out, namely, a
growing division between believers and those who succumb to false prophecy and
"the lie." He concludes by insisting on Pauline traditions and by
praying for divine strength (
⇒
 2 Thes 2:13-17). The
closing part of the letter (
⇒
 2 Thes 3:1-16) deals
in particular with the apostle's directives and model style of life and with
correction of disorderly elements within the community.
Traditional opinion holds
that this letter was written shortly after 1 Thessalonians. Occasionally it has
been argued that 2 Thessalonians was written first or that the two letters are
addressed to different segments within the church at Thessalonica (2
Thessalonians being directed to the Jewish Christians there) or even that 2
Thessalonians was originally written to some other nearby place where Paul
carried out mission work, such as Philippi or Beroea. Increasingly in recent
times, however, the opinion has been advanced that 2 Thessalonians is a
pseudepigraph, that is, a letter written authoritatively in Paul's name, to
maintain apostolic traditions in a later period, perhaps during the last two
decades of the first century.
In any case, the presumed
audience of Second Thessalonians and certain features of its style and content
require that it be read and studied in a Pauline context, particularly that
provided by 1 Thessalonians. At the same time, and especially if the letter is
regarded as not by Paul himself, its apocalyptic presentation of preconditions
for the parousia (
⇒
 2 Thes 2:1-12) may profit from
and require recourse to a wider biblical basis for interpretation, namely Old
Testament books such as Daniel and Isaiah and especially, in the New Testament,
the synoptic apocalyptic discourse (Mark 13; Matthew 24-25;
⇒
 Luke 21:5-36) and the Book of Revelation.
The principal divisions of
the Second Letter to the Thessalonians are the following:
I.          
Address
(
⇒
 2 Thes 1:1-12) 
II.          
Warning
against Deception Concerning the Parousia (
⇒
 2 Thes
2:1-17) 
III.          
Concluding
Exhortations (
⇒
 2 Thes 3:1-16) 
IV.          
Final
Greetings (
⇒
 2 Thes 3:17-18) 