1
This is the word of the LORD that came to
Jonah, son of Amittai: 
[1]
2
"Set out for the great city of Nineveh,
and preach against it; their wickedness has come up before me." 
3
[2]
 But Jonah made ready to flee to Tarshish away
from the LORD. He went down to Joppa, found a ship going to Tarshish, paid the
fare, and went aboard to journey with them to Tarshish, away from the LORD. 
4
The LORD, however, hurled a violent wind upon
the sea, and in the furious tempest that arose the ship was on the point of
breaking up. 
5
Then the mariners became frightened and each one
cried to his god. To lighten the ship for themselves, they threw its cargo into
the sea. Meanwhile, Jonah had gone down into the hold of the ship, and lay
there fast asleep. 
6
The captain came to him and said, "What
are you doing asleep? Rise up, call upon your God! Perhaps God will be mindful
of us so that we may not perish." 
7
Then they said to one another, "Come, let
us cast lots to find out on whose account we have met with this
misfortune." So they cast lots, and thus singled out Jonah. 
8
"Tell us," they said, "what is
your business? Where do you come from? What is your country, and to what people
do you belong?" 
9
"I am a Hebrew," Jonah answered them;
"I worship the LORD, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry
land." 
10
Now the men were seized with great fear and
said to him, "How could you do such a thing!" - They knew that he was
fleeing from the LORD, because he had told them. -  
11
"What shall we do with you," they
asked, "that the sea may quiet down for us?" For the sea was growing
more and more turbulent. 
12
Jonah said to them, "Pick me up and throw
me into the sea, that it may quiet down for you; since I know it is because of
me that this violent storm has come upon you." 
13
Still the men rowed hard to regain the land,
but they could not, for the sea grew ever more turbulent. 
14
[3]
 Then they cried to the LORD: "We beseech
you, O LORD, let us not perish for taking this man's life; do not charge us
with shedding innocent blood, for you, LORD, have done as you saw fit." 
15
Then they took Jonah and threw him into the
sea, and the sea's raging abated. 
16
Struck with great fear of the LORD, the men
offered sacrifice and made vows to him. 
1
 [1] Jonah, son of Amittai: a
prophet of this name lived at the time of Jeroboam II (786-746 B.C.). 
2
 [3] Tarshish: identified by many
with Tartessus, an ancient Phoenician colony in southwest Spain; precise
identification with any particular Phoenician center in the western
Mediterranean is uncertain. To the Hebrews it stood for the far west.
3
 [14] Since it has pleased the Lord
to punish Jonah, the mariners ask that in ridding themselves of him they be not
charged with the crime of murder.