1
Once we had reached safety we learned that the
island was called Malta. 
2
The natives showed us extraordinary
hospitality; they lit a fire and welcomed all of us because it had begun to
rain and was cold. 
3
Paul had gathered a bundle of brushwood and was
putting it on the fire when a viper, escaping from the heat, fastened on his
hand. 
4
When the natives saw the snake hanging from his
hand, they said to one another, "This man must certainly be a murderer;
though he escaped the sea, Justice 
[1]
 has not let him remain
alive." 
5
But he shook the snake off into the fire and
suffered no harm. 
6
They were expecting him to swell up or suddenly
to fall down dead but, after waiting a long time and seeing nothing unusual
happen to him, they changed their minds and began to say that he was a god. 
7
In the vicinity of that place were lands
belonging to a man named Publius, the chief of the island. He welcomed us and
received us cordially as his guests for three days. 
8
It so happened that the father of Publius was
sick with a fever and dysentery. Paul visited him and, after praying, laid his
hands on him and healed him. 
9
After this had taken place, the rest of the
sick on the island came to Paul and were cured. 
10
They paid us great honor and when we eventually
set sail they brought us the provisions we needed. 
11
Three months later we set sail on a ship that
had wintered at the island. It was an Alexandrian ship with the Dioscuri 
[2]
as its figurehead. 
12
We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three
days, 
13
and from there we sailed round the coast and
arrived at Rhegium. After a day, a south wind came up and in two days we
reached Puteoli. 
14
There we found some brothers and were urged to
stay with them for seven days. And thus we came to Rome. 
15
The brothers from there heard about us and came
as far as the Forum of Appius and Three Taverns to meet us. On seeing them,
Paul gave thanks to God and took courage. 
16
When he entered Rome, 
[3]
 Paul
was allowed to live by himself, with the soldier who was guarding him. 
17
[4]
 Three days later he called together the
leaders of the Jews. When they had gathered he said to them, "My brothers,
although I had done nothing against our people or our ancestral customs, I was
handed over to the Romans as a prisoner from Jerusalem. 
18
After trying my case the Romans wanted to
release me, because they found nothing against me deserving the death penalty. 
19
But when the Jews objected, I was obliged to
appeal to Caesar, even though I had no accusation to make against my own
nation. 
20
This is the reason, then, I have requested to
see you and to speak with you, for it is on account of the hope of Israel 
[5]
that I wear these chains." 
21
They answered him, "We have received no
letters from Judea about you, nor has any of the brothers arrived with a
damaging report or rumor about you. 
22
But we should like to hear you present your
views, for we know that this sect is denounced everywhere." 
23
So they arranged a day with him and came to his
lodgings in great numbers. From early morning until evening, he expounded his
position to them, bearing witness to the kingdom of God and trying to convince them
about Jesus from the law of Moses and the prophets. 
24
Some were convinced by what he had said, while
others did not believe. 
25
[6]
 Without reaching any agreement among
themselves they began to leave; then Paul made one final statement. "Well
did the holy Spirit speak to your ancestors through the prophet Isaiah, saying:
26
'Go to this people and say: You shall indeed
hear but not understand. You shall indeed look but never see. 
27
Gross is the heart of this people; they will
not hear with their ears; they have closed their eyes, so they may not see with
their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and be
converted, and I heal them.' 
28
Let it be known to you that this salvation of
God has been sent to the Gentiles; they will listen." 
29
[7]
30
[8]
 He remained for two full years in his
lodgings. He received all who came to him, 
31
and with complete assurance and without
hindrance he proclaimed the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus
Christ. 
1
 [4] Justice: in Greek mythology,
the pursuing goddess of vengeance and justice. 
2
 [11] Dioscuri: that is, the Twin
Brothers, Castor and Pollux, the sons of Zeus and the patrons of the sailors.
3
 [16] With Paul's arrival in Rome,
the programmatic spread of the word of the Lord to "the ends of the
earth" (
⇒
 Acts 1:8) is accomplished. In Rome,
Paul is placed under house arrest, and under this mild form of custody he is
allowed to proclaim the word in the capital of the civilized world of his day.
4
 [17-22] Paul's first act in Rome is
to learn from the leaders of the Jewish community whether the Jews of Jerusalem
plan to pursue their case against him before the Roman jurisdiction. He is
informed that no such plan is afoot, but that the Jews of Rome have heard the
Christian teaching denounced. Paul's offer to explain it to them is readily
accepted.
5
 [20] The hope of Israel: in the
words of Paul (
⇒
 Acts 23:6), Luke has identified
this hope as hope in the resurrection of the dead.
6
 [25-28] Paul's final words in Acts reflect
a major concern of Luke's writings: how the salvation promised in the Old
Testament, accomplished by Jesus, and offered first to Israel
(
⇒
 Acts 13:26), has now been offered to and
accepted by the Gentiles. Quoting 
⇒
 Isaiah 6:9-10,
Paul presents the scriptural support for his indictment of his fellow Jews who
refuse to accept the message he proclaims. Their rejection leads to its
proclamation among the Gentiles.
7
 [29] The Western text has added
here a verse that is not found in the best Greek manuscripts: "And when he
had said this, the Jews left, seriously arguing among themselves."
8
 [30-31] Although the ending of Acts
may seem to be abrupt, Luke has now completed his story with the establishment
of Paul and the proclamation of Christianity in Rome. Paul's confident and
unhindered proclamation of the gospel in Rome forms the climax to the story
whose outline was provided in 
⇒
 Acts 1:8 - "You
will be my witnesses in Jerusalem . . . and to the ends of the earth."