1
Paul looked intently at the Sanhedrin and said,
"My brothers, I have conducted myself with a perfectly clear conscience
before God to this day." 
2
The high priest Ananias 
[1]
ordered his attendants to strike his mouth. 
3
Then Paul said to him, "God will strike
you, 
[2]
 you whitewashed wall. Do you indeed sit in judgment
upon me according to the law and yet in violation of the law order me to be
struck?" 
4
The attendants said, "Would you revile
God's high priest?" 
5
Paul answered, "Brothers, I did not realize
he was the high priest. For it is written, 'You shall not curse a ruler of your
people.'" 
[3]
6
Paul was aware that some were Sadducees and
some Pharisees, so he called out before the Sanhedrin, "My brothers, I am
a Pharisee, the son of Pharisees; (I) am on trial for hope in the resurrection
of the dead." 
7
When he said this, a dispute broke out between
the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the group became divided. 
8
For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection or angels or spirits, while the Pharisees acknowledge all three. 
9
A great uproar occurred, and some scribes
belonging to the Pharisee party stood up and sharply argued, "We find
nothing wrong with this man. Suppose a spirit or an angel has spoken to
him?" 
10
The dispute was so serious that the commander,
afraid that Paul would be torn to pieces by them, ordered his troops to go down
and rescue him from their midst and take him into the compound. 
11
[4]
 The following night the Lord stood by him and
said, "Take courage. For just as you have borne witness to my cause in
Jerusalem, so you must also bear witness in Rome." 
12
When day came, the Jews made a plot and bound
themselves by oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul. 
13
There were more than forty who formed this
conspiracy. 
14
They went to the chief priests and elders and
said, "We have bound ourselves by a solemn oath to taste nothing until we
have killed Paul. 
15
You, together with the Sanhedrin, must now make
an official request to the commander to have him bring him down to you, as
though you meant to investigate his case more thoroughly. We on our part are
prepared to kill him before he arrives." 
16
The son of Paul's sister, however, heard about
the ambush; so he went and entered the compound and reported it to Paul. 
17
Paul then called one of the centurions 
[5]
and requested, "Take this young man to the commander; he has something to
report to him." 
18
So he took him and brought him to the commander
and explained, "The prisoner Paul called me and asked that I bring this
young man to you; he has something to say to you." 
19
The commander took him by the hand, drew him
aside, and asked him privately, "What is it you have to report to
me?" 
20
He replied, "The Jews have conspired to
ask you to bring Paul down to the Sanhedrin tomor row, as though they meant to
inquire about him more thoroughly, 
21
but do not believe them. More than forty of
them are lying in wait for him; they have bound themselves by oath not to eat
or drink until they have killed him. They are now ready and only wait for your
consent." 
22
As the commander dismissed the young man he
directed him, "Tell no one that you gave me this information." 
23
Then he summoned two of the centurions and
said, "Get two hundred soldiers ready to go to Caesarea by nine o'clock
tonight, 
[6]
 along with seventy horsemen and two hundred
auxiliaries. 
24
Provide mounts for Paul to ride and give him
safe conduct to Felix the governor." 
25
Then he wrote a letter with this content: 
26
[7]
 "Claudius Lysias to his excellency the
governor Felix, greetings. 
[8]
27
This man, seized by the Jews and about to be
murdered by them, I rescued after intervening with my troops when I learned
that he was a Roman citizen. 
28
I wanted to learn the reason for their
accusations against him so I brought him down to their Sanhedrin. 
29
I discovered that he was accused in matters of
controversial questions of their law and not of any charge deserving death or
imprisonment. 
30
Since it was brought to my attention that there
will be a plot against the man, I am sending him to you at once, and have also
notified his accusers to state (their case) against him before you." 
31
So the soldiers, according to their orders,
took Paul and escorted him by night to Antipatris. 
32
The next day they re turned to the compound,
leaving the horsemen to complete the journey with him. 
33
When they arrived in Caesarea they delivered
the letter to the governor and presented Paul to him. 
34
When he had read it and asked to what province
he belonged, and learned that he was from Cilicia, 
35
he said, "I shall hear your case when your
accusers arrive." Then he ordered that he be held in custody in Herod's
praetorium. 
1
 [2] The high priest Ananias:
Ananias, son of Nedebaeus, was high priest from A.D. 47 to 59. 
2
 [3] God will strike you: Josephus
reports that Ananias was later assassinated in A.D. 66 at the beginning of the
First Revolt.
3
 [5] Luke portrays Paul as a model
of one who is obedient to the Mosaic law. Paul, because of his reverence for
the law (
⇒
 Exodus 22:27), withdraws his accusation
of hypocrisy, "whitewashed wall" (cf 
⇒
 Matthew
23:27), when he is told Ananias is the high priest.
4
 [11] The occurrence of the vision
of Christ consoling Paul and assuring him that he will be his witness in Rome
prepares the reader for the final section of Acts: the journey of Paul and the
word he preaches to Rome under the protection of the Romans.
5
 [17] Centurions: a centurion was a
military officer in charge of one hundred soldiers.
6
 [23] By nine o'clock tonight:
literally, "by the third hour of the night." The night hours began at
6 P.M. Two hundred auxiliaries: the meaning of the Greek is not certain. It
seems to refer to spearmen from the local police force and not from the cohort
of soldiers, which would have numbered only 500-1000 men.
7
 [26-30] The letter emphasizes the
fact that Paul is a Roman citizen and asserts the lack of evidence that he is
guilty of a crime against the empire. The tone of the letter implies that the
commander became initially involved in Paul's case because of his Roman
citizenship, but this is not an exact description of what really happened (see
⇒
 Acts 21:31-33;
⇒
 22:25-29).
8
 [26] M. Antonius Felix was
procurator of Judea from A.D. 52 to 60. His procuratorship was marked by cruelty
toward and oppression of his Jewish subjects.