1
[1]
 Some who had come down from Judea were
instructing the brothers, "Unless you are circumcised according to the
Mosaic practice, you cannot be saved." 
[2]
2
Because there arose no little dissension and
debate by Paul and Barnabas with them, it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and
some of the others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters
about this question. 
3
They were sent on their journey by the church,
and passed through Phoenicia and Samaria telling of the conversion of the
Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers. 
4
When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were
welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the presbyters, and they
reported what God had done with them. 
5
But some from the party of the Pharisees who
had become believers stood up and said, "It is necessary to circumcise
them and direct them to observe the Mosaic law." 
6
[3]
 The apostles and the presbyters met together
to see about this matter. 
7
[4]
 After much debate had taken place, Peter got
up and said to them, "My brothers, you are well aware that from early days
God made his choice among you that through my mouth the Gentiles would hear the
word of the gospel and believe. 
8
And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by
granting them the holy Spirit just as he did us. 
9
He made no distinction between us and them, for
by faith he purified their hearts. 
10
Why, then, are you now putting God to the test
by placing on the shoulders of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors
nor we have been able to bear? 
11
On the contrary, we believe that we are saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they." 
[5]
12
The whole assembly fell silent, and they
listened while Paul and Barnabas described the signs and wonders God had worked
among the Gentiles through them. 
13
[6]
 After they had fallen silent, James responded,
"My brothers, listen to me. 
14
Symeon 
[7]
 has described how
God first concerned himself with acquiring from among the Gentiles a people for
his name. 
15
The words of the prophets agree with this, as
is written: 
16
'After this I shall return and rebuild the
fallen hut of David; from its ruins I shall rebuild it and raise it up again, 
17
so that the rest of humanity may seek out the Lord,
even all the Gentiles on whom my name is invoked. Thus says the Lord who
accomplishes these things, 
18
known from of old.' 
19
It is my judgment, therefore, that we ought to
stop troubling the Gentiles who turn to God, 
20
but tell them by letter to avoid pollution from
idols, unlawful marriage, the meat of strangled animals, and blood. 
21
For Moses, for generations now, has had those
who proclaim him in every town, as he has been read in the synagogues every
sabbath." 
22
Then the apostles and presbyters, in agreement
with the whole church, decided to choose representatives and to send them to
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. The ones chosen were Judas, who was called
Barsabbas, and Silas, leaders among the brothers. 
23
This is the letter delivered by them: "The
apostles and the presbyters, your brothers, to the brothers in Antioch, Syria,
and Cilicia of Gentile origin: greetings. 
24
Since we have heard that some of our number
(who went out) without any mandate from us have upset you with their teachings
and disturbed your peace of mind, 
25
we have with one accord decided to choose
representatives and to send them to you along with our beloved Barnabas and
Paul, 
26
who have dedicated their lives to the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 
27
So we are sending Judas and Silas who will also
convey this same message by word of mouth: 
28
'It is the decision of the holy Spirit and of
us not to place on you any burden beyond these necessities, 
29
namely, to abstain from meat sacrificed to
idols, from blood, from meats of strangled animals, and from unlawful marriage.
If you keep free of these, you will be doing what is right. Farewell.'" 
30
And so they were sent on their journey. Upon
their arrival in Antioch they called the assembly together and delivered the
letter. 
31
When the people read it, they were delighted
with the exhortation. 
32
Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets,
exhorted and strengthened the brothers with many words. 
33
After they had spent some time there, they were
sent off with greetings of peace from the brothers to those who had
commissioned them. 
34
[8]
35
But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch,
teaching and proclaiming with many others the word of the Lord. 
36
[9]
 After some time, Paul said to Barnabas,
"Come, let us make a return visit to see how the brothers are getting on
in all the cities where we proclaimed the word of the Lord." 
37
Barnabas wanted to take with them also John,
who was called Mark, 
38
but Paul insisted that they should not take
with them someone who had deserted them at Pamphylia and who had not continued
with them in their work. 
39
So sharp was their disagreement that they
separated. Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus. 
40
But Paul chose Silas and departed after being
commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord. 
41
He traveled through Syria and Cilicia bringing
strength to the churches.
1
 [1-35] The Jerusalem
"Council" marks the official rejection of the rigid view that Gentile
converts were obliged to observe the Mosaic law completely. From here to the
end of Acts, Paul and the Gentile mission become the focus of Luke's writing.
2
 [1-5] When some of the converted
Pharisees of Jerusalem discover the results of the first missionary journey of
Paul, they urge that the Gentiles be taught to follow the Mosaic law.
Recognizing the authority of the Jerusalem church, Paul and Barnabas go there
to settle the question of whether Gentiles can embrace a form of Christianity
that does not include this obligation. 
3
 [6-12] The gathering is possibly
the same as that recalled by Paul in 
⇒
 Gal 2:1-10.
Note that in 
⇒
 Acts 15:2 it is only the apostles and
presbyters, a small group, with whom Paul and Barnabas are to meet. Here Luke
gives the meeting a public character because he wishes to emphasize its
doctrinal significance (see 
⇒
 Acts 15:22).
4
 [7-11] Paul's refusal to impose the
Mosaic law on the Gentile Christians is supported by Peter on the ground that
within his own experience God bestowed the holy Spirit upon Cornelius and his
household without preconditions concerning the adoption of the Mosaic law (see
⇒
 Acts 10:44-47).
5
 [11] In support of Paul, Peter
formulates the fundamental meaning of the gospel: that all are invited to be
saved through faith in the power of Christ.
6
 [13-35] Some scholars think that
this apostolic decree suggested by James, the immediate leader of the Jerusalem
community, derives from another historical occasion than the meeting in
question. This seems to be the case if the meeting is the same as the one
related in 
⇒
 Gal 2:1-10. According to that account,
nothing was imposed upon Gentile Christians in respect to Mosaic law; whereas
the decree instructs Gentile Christians of mixed communities to abstain from
meats sacrificed to idols and from blood-meats, and to avoid marriage within
forbidden degrees of consanguinity and affinity (Lev 18), all of which
practices were especially abhorrent to Jews. Luke seems to have telescoped two
originally independent incidents here: the first a Jerusalem
"Council" that dealt with the question of circumcision, and the second
a Jerusalem decree dealing mainly with Gentile observance of dietary laws (see
⇒
 Acts 21:25 where Paul seems to be learning of the
decree for the first time).
7
 [14] Symeon: elsewhere in Acts he
is called either Peter or Simon. The presence of the name Symeon here suggests
that, in the source Luke is using for this part of the Jerusalem
"Council" incident, the name may have originally referred to someone
other than Peter (see 
⇒
 Acts 13:1 where the
Antiochene Symeon Niger is mentioned). As the text now stands, however, it is
undoubtedly a reference to Simon Peter (
⇒
15:7).
8
 [34] Some manuscripts add, in
various wordings, "But Silas decided to remain there."
9
[
⇒
 15:36-
⇒
 18:22] This
continuous narrative recounts Paul's second missionary journey. On the internal
evidence of the Lucan account, it lasted about three years. Paul first visited
the communities he had established on his first journey
(
⇒
 Acts 16:1-5), then pushed on into Macedonia,
where he established communities at Philippi, Thessalonica, and Beroea
(
⇒
 Acts 16:7-
⇒
 17:5). To
escape the hostility of the Jews of Thessalonica, he left for Greece and while
resident in Athens attempted, without success, to establish an effective
Christian community there. From Athens he proceeded to Corinth and, after a stay
of a year and a half, returned to Antioch by way of Ephesus and Jerusalem
(
⇒
 Acts 17:16-
⇒
 18:22).
Luke does not concern himself with the structure or statistics of the
communities but aims to show the general progress of the gospel in the Gentile
world as well as its continued failure to take root in the Jewish community.