1
[1]
 But you, Bethlehem-Ephrathah too small to be
among the clans of Judah, From you shall come forth for me one who is to be
ruler in Israel; Whose origin is from of old, from ancient times. 
2
[2]
 (Therefore the Lord will give them up, until
the time when she who is to give birth has borne, And the rest of his brethren
shall return to the children of Israel.) 
3
He shall stand firm and shepherd his flock by
the strength of the LORD, in the majestic name of the LORD, his God; And they
shall remain, for now his greatness shall reach to the ends of the earth; 
4
[3]
 he shall be peace. If Assyria invades our country
and treads upon our land, We shall raise against it seven shepherds, eight men
of royal rank; 
5
[4]
 And they shall tend the land of Assyria with
the sword, and the land of Nimrod with the drawn sword; And we shall be delivered
from Assyria, if it invades our land and treads upon our borders. 
6
The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of
many peoples, Like dew coming from the LORD, like raindrops on the grass, Which
wait for no man, nor tarry for the sons of men. 
7
And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the
nations, in the midst of many peoples, Like a lion among beasts of the forest,
like a young lion among flocks of sheep; When it passes through, it tramples
and tears, and there is none to deliver. 
8
Your hand shall be lifted above your foes, and
all your enemies shall be destroyed. 
9
[5]
 On that day, says the LORD, I will destroy the
horses from your midst and ruin your chariots; 
10
I will demolish the cities of your land and
tear down all your fortresses. 
11
I will abolish the means of divination from
your use, and there shall no longer be soothsayers among you. 
12
[6]
 I will abolish your carved images and the
sacred pillars from your midst; And you shall no longer adore the works of your
hands. 
13
I will tear out the sacred poles from your
midst, and destroy your cities. 
14
I will wreak vengeance in anger and wrath upon
the nations that have not hearkened. 
1
 [1] In contrast to Bat-gader
(
⇒
 Micah 4:13(14)), where the ruler of Israel, the
reigning king, is in peril of his life from the Assyrians, is the tiny city and
clan of Bethlehem-Ephrathah, from which comes the ancient Davidic dynasty
(whose origin is from of old, from ancient times) with its messianic King, one
who is to be ruler in Israel. 
2
 [2] She who is to give birth: the
mother of the Messiah; cf 
⇒
 Isaiah 7:14.
3
 [4-5] This passage, expressing
confidence in Judah's ability to deliver itself from Assyria, is in contrast
with the preceding messianic oracle, which ascribes deliverance to the Lord and
his agent. Some believe that here the prophet is quoting the words of the
defiant men of Judah. The shepherds and men of royal rank are one and the same:
warriors capable of routing Assyria. The same kind of numerical progression is
used by Amos (
⇒
 Amos 1:3), and elsewhere in the
Bible.
4
 [5] Nimrod: the legendary ancestor
of the Mesopotamians; cf 
⇒
 Genesis 10:10-12.
5
 [9-13] Part of the messianic
restoration will consist in the removal of everything that has drawn Israel
away from the Lord; this includes not only the objects of false worship, but
also the armaments in which the idolaters had trusted.
6
 [12-14] Sacred pillars . . . sacred
poles: see note on Exodus 34; 13.