Introduction
Introduction
Hosea belonged to
the northern kingdom and began his prophetic career in the last years of
Jeroboam II (786-746 B.C.). Some believe that he was a priest, others that he
was a cult prophet; the prophecy, our only source of information concerning his
life, gives us no certain answer in the matter. The collected oracles reveal a
very sensitive, emotional man who could pass quickly from violent anger to the
deepest tenderness. The prophecy pivots around his own unfortunate marriage to
Gomer, a personal tragedy which profoundly influenced his teaching. In fact,
his own prophetic vocation and message were immeasurably deepened by the
painful experience he underwent in his married life.
Gomer, the adultress,
symbolized faithless Israel. And just as Hosea could not give up his wife
forever even when she played the harlot, so Yahweh could not renounce Israel,
who had been betrothed to him. God would chastise, but it would be the
chastisement of the jealous lover, longing to bring back the beloved to the
fresh and pure joy of their first love.
Israel's infidelity took
the form of idolatry and ruthless oppression of the poor. No amount of
mechanically offered sacrifices could atone for her serious sins. Chastisement
alone remained; God would have to strip her of the rich ornaments bestowed by
her false lovers and thus bring her back to the true lover. A humiliated Israel
would again seek Yahweh. The eleventh chapter of Hosea is one of the summits of
Old Testament theology; God's love for his people has never been expressed more
tenderly. Hosea began the tradition of describing the relation between Yahweh
and Israel in terms of marriage. This symbolism appears later on in the Old
Testament; and, in the New, both St. John and St. Paul express in the same
imagery the union between Christ and his Church.
The Book of Hosea is
divided as follows:
I.          
The
Prophet's Marriage and Its Lesson (
⇒
1:1-
⇒
 3:5) 
II.          
Israel's
Guilt and Punishment (
⇒
4:1-
⇒
 14:9(10))