1
[1]
 The word of the LORD that came to Hosea, the
son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of Judah,
and in the days of Jeroboam, son of Joash, king of Israel. 
2
In the beginning of the LORD'S speaking to Hosea,
the LORD said to Hosea: Go, take a harlot wife 
[2]
 and
harlot's children, for the land gives itself to harlotry, turning away from the
LORD. 
3
So he went and took Gomer, the daughter of
Diblaim; and she conceived and bore him a son. 
4
[3]
 Then the LORD said to him: Give him the name
Jezreel, for in a little while I will punish the house of Jehu for the
bloodshed at Jezreel And bring to an end the kingdom of the house of Israel; 
5
On that day I will break the bow of Israel in
the valley of Jezreel. 
6
[4]
 When she conceived again and bore a daughter,
the LORD said to him: Give her the name Lo-ruhama; I no longer feel pity for
the house of Israel: rather, I abhor them utterly. 
7
[5]
 Yet for the house of Judah I feel pity; I will
save them by the LORD, their God; But I will not save them by war, by sword or
bow, by horses or horsemen. 
8
After she weaned Lo-ruhama, she conceived and
bore a son. 
9
[6]
 Then the LORD said: Give him the name Lo-ammi,
for you are not my people, and I will not be your God. 
1
 [Hosea 1-3] This section is
ordinarily thought to be biographical, the prophet's personal tragedy figuring
as the relation of God to his people Israel. Hosea's marriage to a harlot wife
represents Israel's infidelity to her Lord; hence the symbolic names of the
children (
⇒
 Hosea 1:4-9). In 
⇒
2:4-23 the Lord protests this infidelity and decrees its
consequences, but promises restoration in return for amendment; his punishments
are medicinal. In Hosea 3 He once more takes back his wife, but only
conditionally, signifying God's long-suffering love for Israel and hope for her
return. 
2
 [2] A harlot wife: this does not
necessarily mean that Gomer was a harlot when Hosea married her; the verse
describes the event in its final consequences.
3
 [4] Jezreel: the strategic valley
in northern Israel where Jehu brought the dynasty of Omri to an end through
bloodshed (2 Kings 9-10). Jeroboam II was the last king but one of the house of
Jehu; the prophecy in this verse was fulfilled by the murder of his son, who
reigned only six months (
⇒
 2 Kings 15:8-10).
4
 [6] Lo-ruhama: "she is not
pitied." The "pity" that is here withheld from Israel is God's
gratuitous love which inspires his beneficent acts.
5
 [7] The terrible punishments announced
by the prophets were so fully realized that later generations made a point of
recalling the same prophets' messages of consolation also, even though it meant
taking these from another context. Thus, an editor placed the words of
(
⇒
 2:1-3) 
⇒
 Hosea 3:5 after
the repudiation of Israel in 
⇒
 Hosea 1:9; here the
more natural order has been restored. The present verse is another example of
the same thing. In addition, it may be the work of a later hand, dating from a
time when the prophecies of Hosea were circulated in the south, after the
dissolution of the northern kingdom that he had prophesied. The second part of
the verse emphasizes the power of the Lord, who needs no human agents to
fulfill his will. It may refer to the deliverance of Jerusalem from the siege
of Sennacherib (
⇒
 2 Kings 19:35-37).
6
 [9] Lo-ammi: "not my
people."