1
A trumpet to your lips, You who watch over the
house of the LORD! Since they have violated my covenant, and sinned against my
law, 
2
While to me they cry out, "O, God of
Israel, we know you!" 
3
The men of Israel have thrown away what is
good; the enemy shall pursue them. 
4
[1]
 They made kings, but not by my authority; they
established princes, but without my approval. With their silver and gold they
made idols for themselves, to their own destruction. 
5
Cast away your calf, O Samaria! my wrath is
kindled against them; How long will they be unable to attain innocence in
Israel? 
6
The work of an artisan no god at all, Destined
for the flames -  such is the calf of
Samaria! 
7
When they sow the wind, they shall reap the
whirlwind; The stalk of grain that forms no ear can yield no flour; Even if it could,
strangers would swallow it. 
8
Israel is swallowed up; he is now among the
nations a thing of no value. 
9
They went up to Assyria -  a wild ass off on its own -  Ephraim bargained for lovers. 
10
Even though they bargain with the nations, I
will now gather an army; King and princes shall shortly succumb under the
burden. 
11
[2]
 When Ephraim made many altars to expiate sin,
his altars became occasions of sin. 
12
Though I write for him my many ordinances, they
are considered as a stranger's. 
13
Though they offer sacrifice, immolate flesh and
eat it, the LORD is not pleased with them. He shall still remember their guilt
and punish their sins; they shall return to Egypt. 
14
Israel has forgotten his maker and built
palaces. Judah, too, has fortified many cities, but I will send fire upon his
cities, to devour their castles. 
1
 [4-6] Israel's monarchy and
separate sanctuary are here associated, as in 
⇒
 1 Kings
12:20-33; both were the result of rebellion against the divinely
approved Davidic dynasty and the Jerusalem temple with the ark of the covenant.
The calf image set up by Jeroboam I in the royal shrines prevented Israel from
attaining innocence (
⇒
 Hosea 8:5-6). 
2
 [11] The very multiplicity of
sanctuaries throughout the land was a danger to the purity of worship. The
local shrines were speedily assimilated to the cult places used by the
Canaanites, and the Lord was identified with the god Baal worshiped there. Thus
the Deuteronomic writers, influenced by prophetic ideas, ended by restricting
sacrificial worship to the one temple in Jerusalem.