1
In the month Nisan of the twentieth year of
King Artaxerxes, when the wine was in my charge, I took some and offered it to
the king. As I had never before been sad in his presence, 
2
the king asked me, "Why do you look sad?
If you are not sick, you must be sad at heart." Though I was seized with
great fear, 
3
I answered the king: "May the king live
forever! How could I not look sad when the city where my ancestors are buried
lies in ruins, and its gates have been eaten out by fire?" 
4
The king asked me, "What is it, then, that
you wish?" I prayed to the God of heaven 
5
and then answered the king: "If it please
the king, and if your servant is deserving of your favor, send me to Judah, to
the city of my ancestors' graves, to rebuild it." 
6
Then the king, and the queen seated beside him,
asked me how long my journey would take and when I would return. I set a date
that was acceptable to him, and the king agreed that I might go. 
7
I asked the king further: "If it please
the king, let letters be given to me for the governors of West-of-Euphrates,
that they may afford me safe-conduct till I arrive in Judah; 
8
also a letter for Asaph, the keeper of the
royal park, that he may give me wood for timbering the gates of the
temple-citadel and for the city wall and the house that I shall occupy."
The king granted my requests, for the favoring hand of my God was upon me. 
9
Thus I proceeded to the governors of
West-of-Euphrates and presented the king's letters to them. The king also sent
with me army officers and cavalry. 
10
[1]
 When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the
Ammonite slave had heard of this, they were very much displeased that someone
had come to seek the welfare of the Israelites. 
11
When I had arrived in Jerusalem, I first rested
there for three days. 
12
Then I set out by night with only a few other
men (for I had not told anyone what my God had inspired me to do for Jerusalem)
and with no other animals but my own mount. 
13
[2]
 I rode out at night by the Valley Gate, passed
by the Dragon Spring, and came to the Dung Gate, observing how the walls of
Jerusalem lay in ruins and its gates had been eaten out by fire. 
14
Then I passed over to the Spring Gate and to
the King's Pool. Since there was no room here for my mount to pass with me
astride, 
15
I continued on foot up the wadi by night,
inspecting the wall all the while till I once more reached the Valley Gate, by
which I went back in. 
16
The magistrates knew nothing of where I had
gone or what I was doing, for as yet I had disclosed nothing to the Jews,
neither to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the magistrates, nor to the
others who would be concerned about the matter. 
17
Afterward I said to them: "You see the
evil plight in which we stand: how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates have
been gutted by fire. Come, let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, so that we may
no longer be an object of derision!" 
18
Then I explained to them how the favoring hand
of my God had rested upon me, and what the king had said to me. They replied,
"Let us be up and building!" And they undertook the good work with
vigor. 
19
On hearing of this, Sanballat the Horonite,
Tobiah the Ammonite slave, and Geshem the Arab mocked us and ridiculed us.
"What is this that you are about?" they asked. "Are you
rebelling against the king?" 
20
[3]
 My answer to them was this: "It is the
God of heaven who will grant us success. We, his servants, shall set about the
rebuilding; but for you there is to be neither share nor claim nor memorial in
Jerusalem." 
1
 [10] Sanballat the Horonite: the
governor of the province of Samaria [
⇒
3:32(33,34)], apparently a native of one of the Beth-horons. A letter
from the Jews living at Elephantine in southern Egypt, dated 408-407 B. C.,
mentions "Delayah and Shelemyah, the sons of Sanballat, the governor of
Samaria." Although his own name was Babylonian-Sin-uballit, i.e.,
"Sin (the moon god) has given life"-his two sons had names referring
to Yahweh. Tobiah, the Ammonite slave: the governor of the province of Ammon in
Transjordan. His honorary title, "servant" (in Hebrew, ebed), i.e.,
of the king, could also be understood as slave, and Nehemiah no doubt meant it
in this derogatory sense. The Tobiads remained a powerful family even in
Maccabean times (
⇒
 2 Macc 3:11). Sanballat and
Tobiah, together with Geshem the Arab (
⇒
2:19; 
⇒
 6:1, 2),
who was probably in charge of Edom and the regions to the south and southeast
of Judah, opposed the rebuilding of Jerusalem's walls on political grounds; the
city was the capital of a rival province. 
2
 [13-15] Nehemiah left Jerusalem by
the Valley Gate near the northwestern end of the old City of David and went
south down the Tyropoean Valley toward the Dragon Spring (or the En-rogel of
⇒
 Joshua 15:7; 
⇒
 18:16;
⇒
 2 Sam 17:17; 
⇒
 1 Kings
1:9 now known as Job's Well) at the juncture of the Valley of Hinnom
and the Kidron Valley; he then turned north at the Dung Gate (or the Potsherd
Gate of 
⇒
 Jeremiah 19:2) at the southern end of the
city and proceeded up the wadi, that is, the Kidron Valley, passing the Spring
Gate (at the Spring of Gihon) and the King's Pool (unidentified); finally he
turned west and then south to his starting point.
3
 [20] Neither share nor claim nor
memorial: although Sanballat and Tobiah were Yahwist, Nehemiah would not let
them participate in any of the rights of the religious community in Jerusalem.