Introduction
Introduction
The Book of
Esther is named after its Jewish heroine. It tells the story of the plot of
Haman the Agagite, jealous and powerful vizier of King Xerxes (Ahasuerus) of
Persia (485-464 B.C.), to destroy in a single day all the Jews living in the
Persian Empire. He is moved to this out of hatred for the Jewish servant
Mordecai, who for religious motives refuses to render him homage. The day of
the proposed massacre is determined by lot. Meanwhile Esther, niece and adopted
daughter of Mordecai, is chosen queen by King Xerxes in place of Vashti. She
averts the pogrom planned against her people and has the royal decree of
extermination reversed against Haman and the enemies of the Jews. Mordecai
replaces Haman, and together with Esther, works for the welfare of their
people. The event is celebrated with feasting and great joy, and the memory of
it is to be perpetuated by the annual observance of the feast of Purim (lots),
when the lot of destruction for the Jews was reversed for one of deliverance
and triumph by Queen Esther and her uncle Mordecai.
The purpose of the book is
didactic: the glorification of the Jewish people and the explanation of the
origin, significance and date of the feast of Purim on the fourteenth and
fifteenth of Adar (February-March). The book was intended as a consolation for
Israel, a reminder that God's providence continually watches over them, never
abandoning them when they serve him faithfully or turn to him in sincere
repentance. There is no justification for interpreting the story in
mythological or cultic terms, as though Mordecai and Esther represented Marduk
and Ishtar in their mythological triumph over two Elamite deities.
The Hebrew text of Esther
is found in the Hebrew Bible, where it is the last of the five megilloth
(scrolls) read on special feasts of the Jewish liturgical year.
The book is a free
composition - not a historical document, despite the Achaemenian coloring of
the narrative. Its time of composition may well have been at the end of the
Persian Empire, toward the close of the fourth century B.C. The author shows
skill in developing his story and in using the art of contrast for instruction
and edification. The solution to the difficulties of the book is to be found in
its literary presentation rather than in a forced attempt to square detailed
data of the narrative with facts. The evident literary motif of the reversal of
fortune of the prosperous wicked and the oppressed virtuous through eventual
punishment of the former and triumph of the latter, finds parallels in the
story of Joseph (Gn 37; 39-45) and of Judith (8-16). The book is vindictive,
but it should be remembered that the precept of love of enemies had not yet
been taught by the word and example of Christ.
The text of Esther, written
originally in Hebrew, was transmitted in two forms: a short Hebrew form and a
longer Greek version. The latter contains 107 additional verses, inserted at
appropriate places within the Hebrew form of the text. A few of these seem to
have a Hebrew origin while the rest are Greek in original composition. It is
possible that the Hebrew form of the text is original throughout. If it systematically
omits reference to God and his Providence over Israel, this is perhaps due to
fear of irreverent response (see note on 4, 14). The Greek text with the
above-mentioned additions is probably a later literary paraphrase in which the
author seeks to have the reader share his sentiments. This standard Greek text
is pre-Christian in origin. The church has accepted the additions as equally
inspired with the rest of the book.
In the present translation,
the portions preceded by the letters A through F indicate the underlying Greek
additions referred to above. The regular chapter numbers apply to the Hebrew
text.
The book may be divided as
follows:
1.     Prologue (A, 1-17) 
2.     Elevation of Esther (1, 1-2, 23) 
3.     Haman's Plot against the Jews (3,
1-13; B, 1-7; 3, 14-4, 8; B, 8; 4, 9-16; C, 1-D, 16; 5, 1-14) 
4.     Vindication of the Jews (6, 1-8, 12;
E, 1-24; 8, 13-10, 3) 
5.     Epilogue (F, 1-11) 
The order of the Vulgate
text in relation to the order of the Greek text is as follows:
Vulg. 11, 2-12, 6 == A,
1-17 at the beginning of the book.
13, 1-7 == B, 1-7 after 3, 13.
13, 8-15, 3-19 == C, 1-D, 16 after 4, 16.
15, 1-2 == B, 8.9 after 4, 8.
16, 1-24 == E, 1-24 after 8, 12.
10, 4-10, 13 == F, 1-10 after 10, 3.
I: Prologue 