1
That day King Ahasuerus gave the house of Haman,
enemy of the Jews, to Queen Esther; and Mordecai was admitted to the king's
presence, for Esther had revealed his relationship to her. 
2
The king removed his signet ring from Haman,
and transferred it into the keeping of Mordecai; and Esther put Mordecai in
charge of the house of Haman. 
3
In another audience with the king, Esther fell
at his feet and tearfully implored him to revoke the harm done by Haman the
Agagite, and the plan he had devised against the Jews. 
4
The king stretched forth the golden scepter to
Esther. So she rose and, standing in his presence, 
5
said: "If it pleases your majesty and
seems proper to you, and if I have found favor with you and you love me, let a
document be issued to revoke the letters which that schemer Haman, son of
Hammedatha the Agagite, wrote for the destruction of the Jews in all the royal
provinces. 
6
For how can I witness the evil that is to
befall my people, and how can I behold the destruction of my race?" 
7
King Ahasuerus then said to Queen Esther and to
the Jew Mordecai: "Now that I have given Esther the house of Haman, and
they have hanged him on the gibbet because he attacked the Jews, 
8
[1]
 you in turn may write in the king's name what
you see fit concerning the Jews and seal the letter with the royal signet
ring." For whatever is written in the name of the king and sealed with the
royal signet ring cannot be revoked. 
9
At that time, on the twenty-third day of the
third month, Sivan, the royal scribes were summoned. Exactly as Mordecai
dictated, they wrote to the Jews and to the satraps, governors, and officials
of the hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia: to each
province in its own script and to each people in its own language, and to the
Jews in their own script and language. 
10
These letters, which he wrote in the name of
King Ahasuerus and sealed with the royal signet ring, he sent by mounted
couriers riding thoroughbred royal steeds. 
11
In these letters the king authorized the Jews
in each and every city to group together and defend their lives, and to kill,
destroy, wipe out, along with their wives and children, every armed group of
any nation or province which should attack them, and to seize their goods as
spoil 
12
throughout the provinces of King Ahasuerus, on
a single day, the thirteenth of the twelfth month, Adar. 
13
[2]
 A copy of the letter to be promulgated as law
in each and every province was published among all the peoples, so that the
Jews might be prepared on that day to avenge themselves on their enemies. 
14
Couriers mounted on royal steeds sped forth in
haste at the king's order, and the decree was promulgated in the stronghold of
Susa. 
15
Mordecai left the king's presence clothed in a royal
robe of violet and of white cotton, with a large crown of gold and a cloak of
crimson byssus. The city of Susa shouted with joy, 
16
and there was splendor and merriment for the
Jews, exultation and triumph. 
17
In each and every province and in each and
every city, wherever the king's order arrived, there was merriment and
exultation, banqueting and feasting for the Jews. And many of the peoples of
the land embraced Judaism, for they were seized with a fear of the Jews. 
1
 [8] Whatever is written . . .
cannot be revoked: the king cannot directly grant Esther's request
(
⇒
 Esther 8:5) to revoke the previous decree against
the Jews because of the irrevocable character of the laws of the Medes and
Persians (
⇒
 Esther 1:19; 
⇒
 Daniel
6:9); but he empowers Esther to issue a new decree in his name which
renders the earlier decree without effect; cf 
⇒
3:12f. 
2
 [13] Avenge themselves on their
enemies: partly in self-defense (
⇒
 Esther E:20), and
partly to express the fact that the extreme cruelty designed against the Jews
by their enemies now recoiled upon the latter as a punishment. Cf 
⇒
9:1f.