1
Then Mordecai said: "This is the work of
God. 
2
I recall the dream I had about these very
things, and not a single detail has been left unfulfilled- 
3
the tiny spring that grew into a river, the
light of the sun, the many waters. The river is Esther, whom the king married
and made queen. 
4
The two dragons are myself and Haman. 
5
The nations are those who assembled to destroy
the name of the Jews, 
6
but my people is Israel, who cried to God and
was saved. "The LORD saved his people and delivered us from all these
evils. God worked signs and great wonders, such as have not occurred among the
nations. 
7
[1]
 For this purpose he arranged two lots: one for
the people of God, the second for all the other nations. 
8
These two lots were fulfilled in the hour, the
time, and the day of judgment before God and among all the nations. 
9
God remembered his people and rendered justice
to his inheritance. 
10
[2]
 "Gathering together with joy and
happiness before God, they shall celebrate these days on the fourteenth and
fifteenth of the month Adar throughout all future generations of his people
Israel." 
1
 [7] Two lots: in this passage of
the Greek text, which gives a more religious interpretation of the feast, the
two lots are drawn by God to determine, respectively, the destiny of Israel and
that of the nations. In 
⇒
 Esther 3:7 above, translated
from the Hebrew text, the feast is called Purim because of the lots which Aman
Cast to determine the day for the extinction of the Jews. 
2
 [10] The Greek text of Esther
contains a postscript as follows: In the fourth year of the reign of Ptolemy
and Cleopatra, Dositheus, who said he was a priest and Levite, and his son
Ptolemy brought the present letter of Purim, saying that it was genuine and
that Lysimachus, son of Ptolemy, of the community of Jerusalem, had translated
it. The date referred to in this postscript is most probably 78-77 B.C., in the
reign of Ptolemy XII and Cleopatra V.