1
The following is a copy of the letter: 
"King Ahasuerus the Great to the governors of the provinces in the hundred
and twenty-seven satrapies from India to Ethiopia, and to those responsible for
our interests: Greetings!
2
"Many have become the more ambitious the
more they were showered with honors through the bountiful generosity of their
patrons. 
3
Not only do they seek to do harm to our
subjects; incapable of bearing such greatness, they even begin plotting against
their own benefactors. 
4
Not only do they drive out gratitude from among
men; with the arrogant boastfulness of those to whom goodness has no meaning,
they suppose they will escape the vindictive judgment of the all-seeing God. 
5
"Often, too, the fair speech of friends
entrusted with the administration of affairs has induced many placed in
authority to become accomplices in the shedding of innocent blood, and has involved
them in irreparable calamities 
6
by deceiving with malicious slander the sincere
good will of rulers. 
7
This can be verified in the ancient stories
that have been handed down to us, but more fully when one considers the wicked
deeds perpetrated in your midst by the pestilential influence of those
undeserving of authority. 
8
We must provide for the future, so as to render
the kingdom undisturbed and peaceful for all men, 
9
taking advantage of changing conditions and
deciding always with equitable treatment matters coming to our attention. 
10
[1]
 "For instance, Haman, son of Hammedatha, a
Macedonian, certainly not of Persian blood, and very different from us in
generosity, was hospitably received by us. 
11
He so far enjoyed the good will which we have
toward all peoples that he was proclaimed "father of the king,' before
whom everyone was to bow down; he attained the rank second to the royal throne.
12
But, unequal to this dignity, he strove to
deprive us of kingdom and of life; 
13
and by weaving intricate webs of deceit, he
demanded the destruction of Mordecai, our savior and constant benefactor, and
of Esther, our blameless royal consort, together with their whole race. 
14
For by such measures he hoped to catch us
defenseless and to transfer the rule of the Persians to the Macedonians. 
15
But we find that the Jews, who were doomed to
extinction by this archcriminal, are not evildoers, but rather are governed by
very just laws 
16
and are the children of the Most High, the
living God of majesty, who has maintained the kingdom in a flourishing
condition for us and for our forebears. 
17
"You will do well, then, to ignore the
letter sent by Haman, son of Hammedatha, 
18
for he who composed it has been hanged,
together with his entire household, before the gates of Susa. Thus swiftly has
God, who governs all, brought just punishment upon him. 
19
"You shall exhibit a copy of this letter
publicly in every place, to certify that the Jews may follow their own laws, 
20
and that you may help them on the day set for
their ruin, the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar, to defend themselves
against those who attack them. 
21
For God, the ruler of all, has turned that day
for them from one of destruction of the chosen race into one of joy. 
22
Therefore, you too must celebrate this
memorable day among your designated feasts with all rejoicing, 
23
so that both now and in the future it may be,
for us and for loyal Persians, a celebration of victory, and for those who plot
against us a reminder of destruction. 
24
"Every city and province, without exception,
that does not observe this decree shall be ruthlessly destroyed with fire and
sword, so that it will be left not merely untrodden by men, but even shunned by
wild beasts and birds forever." 
1
 [10] Macedonian: a redactor of the
book in the Hellenistic period used the designation Macedonian, here and in
⇒
 Esther E:14, to express, after Macedonia's
conquest of Persia, the most odious kind of man that a Persian ruler could be
supposed to think of; the Hebrew text, for a similar reason, called Haman an
Agagite. See note on 
⇒
 Esther A:17. 