1
[1]
 During the reign of Ahasuerus-this was the
Ahasuerus who ruled over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India to
Ethiopia- 
2
[2]
 while he was occupying the royal throne in the
stronghold of Susa, 
3
in the third year of his reign, he presided
over a feast for all his officers and ministers: the Persian and Median
aristocracy, the nobles, and the governors of the provinces. 
4
For as many as a hundred and eighty days, he
displayed the glorious riches of his kingdom and the resplendent wealth of his
royal estate. 
5
At the end of this time the king gave a feast
of seven days in the garden court of the royal palace for all the people, great
and small, who were in the stronghold of Susa. 
6
There were white cotton draperies and violet
hangings, held by cords of crimson byssus from silver rings on marble pillars.
Gold and silver couches were on the pavement, which was of porphyry, marble,
mother-of-pearl, and colored stones. 
7
Liquor was served in a variety of golden cups,
and the royal wine flowed freely, as befitted the king's munificence. 
8
By ordinance of the king the drinking was
unstinted, for he had instructed all the stewards of his household to comply
with the good pleasure of everyone. 
9
[3]
 Queen Vashti also gave a feast for the women inside
the royal palace of King Ahasuerus. 
10
On the seventh day, when the king was merry
with wine, he instructed Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and
Carkas, the seven eunuchs who attended King Ahasuerus, 
11
to bring Queen Vashti into his presence wearing
the royal crown, that he might display her beauty to the populace and the
officials, for she was lovely to behold. 
12
But Queen Vashti refused to come at the royal
order issued through the eunuchs. At this the king's wrath flared up, and he
burned with fury. 
13
He conferred with the wise men versed in the
law, because the king's business was conducted in general consultation with
lawyers and jurists. 
14
He summoned Carshena, Shethar, Admatha,
Tarshish, Meres, Marsena and Memucan, the seven Persian and Median officials
who were in the king's personal service and held first rank in the realm, 
15
and asked them, "What is to be done by law
with Queen Vashti for disobeying the order of King Ahasuerus issued through the
eunuchs?" 
16
In the presence of the king and of the
officials, Memucan answered: "Queen Vashti has not wronged the king alone,
but all the officials and the populace throughout the provinces of King
Ahasuerus. 
17
For the queen's conduct will become known to
all the women, and they will look with disdain upon their husbands when it is
reported, "King Ahasuerus commanded that Queen Vashti be ushered into his
presence, but she would not come.' 
18
This very day the Persian and Median ladies who
hear of the queen's conduct will rebel against all the royal officials, with
corresponding disdain and rancor. 
19
[4]
 If it please the king, let an irrevocable
royal decree be issued by him and inscribed among the laws of the Persians and
Medes, forbidding Vashti to come into the presence of King Ahasuerus and
authorizing the king to give her royal dignity to one more worthy than she. 
20
Thus, when the decree which the king will issue
is published throughout his realm, vast as it is, all wives will honor their
husbands, from the greatest to the least." 
21
This proposal found acceptance with the king
and the officials, and the king acted on the advice of Memucan. 
22
[5]
 He sent letters to all the royal provinces, to
each province in its own script and to each people in its own language, to the
effect that every man should be lord in his own home. 
1
 [1] From India to Ethiopia: from
western India to Upper Egypt, the greatest extent of the Persian Empire
achieved under Darius the Great, father of Ahasuerus. 
2
 [2] Susa: ancient capital of Elam
(
⇒
 Genesis 14:1); under the Achamenid kings, one of
the two capitals of the Persian Empire. The other was Persepolis, the summer
palace of the kings.
3
 [9] Queen Vashti: Herodotus
(Histories 7:61) relates that the wife of Ahasuerus was Amestris.
4
 [19] Irrevocable royal decree: the
historian Siculus Indicates that such a concept of irrevocable laws existed in
the time of Darius III (335-331 B.C.), the last of the Persian kings; cf
⇒
 Esther 8:8.
5
 [22] To each province . . . script
and to each people . . . language: many languages were spoken in the Persian
Empire, the principal ones being Persian, Elamite, Babylonian, Aramaic,
Phoenician, Egyptian, and Greek. Each of them had its own script.