1
After these events King Ahasuerus raised Haman,
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, to high rank, seating him above all his fellow
officials. 
2
[1]
 All the king's servants who were at the royal
gate would kneel and bow down to Haman, for that is what the king had ordered
in his regard. Mordecai, however, would not kneel and bow down. 
3
The king's servants who were at the royal gate
said to Mordecai, "Why do you disobey the king's order?" 
4
When they had reminded him day after day and he
would not listen to them, they informed Haman, to see whether Mordecai's
explanation was acceptable, since he had told them that he was a Jew. 
5
When Haman observed that Mordecai would not
kneel and bow down to him, he was filled with anger. 
6
Moreover, he thought it was not enough to lay
hands on Mordecai alone. Since they had told Haman of Mordecai's nationality,
he sought to destroy all the Jews, Mordecai's people, throughout the realm of
King Ahasuerus. 
7
[2]
 In the first month, Nisan, in the twelfth year
of King Ahasuerus, the pur, or lot, was cast in Haman's presence to determine
the day and the month for the destruction of Mordecai's people on a single day,
and the lot fell on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar. 
8
Then Haman said to King Ahasuerus:
"Dispersed among the nations throughout the provinces of your kingdom,
there is a certain people living apart, with laws differing from those of every
other people. They do not obey the laws of the king, and so it is not proper
for the king to tolerate them. 
9
If it please the king, let a decree be issued
to destroy them; and I will deliver to the procurators ten thousand silver
talents for deposit in the royal treasury." 
10
[3]
 The king took the signet ring from his hand
and gave it to Haman, son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews. 
11
"The silver you may keep," the king
said to Haman, "but as for this people, do with them whatever you
please." 
12
So the royal scribes were summoned; and on the
thirteenth day of the first month they wrote, at the dictation of Haman, an
order to the royal satraps, the governors of every province, and the officials
of every people, to each province in its own script and to each people in its
own language. It was written in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with the
royal signet ring. 
13
Letters were sent by couriers to all the royal
provinces, that all the Jews, young and old, including women and children,
should be killed, destroyed, wiped out in one day, the thirteenth day of the
twelfth month, Adar, and that their goods should be seized as spoil. 
1
 [2] Mordecai . . . would not kneel
and bow down: in order not to render to man the homage which he regarded as
belonging to God alone; cf 
⇒
 Esther C:5ff. 
2
 [7] Pur: a Babylonian word which
the Hebrew translates as goral, "lot." This word is preserved in the
text because its plural, purim, became the name of the feast of Purim
commemorating the deliverance of the Jews; cf 
⇒
9:24, 
⇒
 26.
3
 [10] Signet ring: a ring containing
a seal which was impressed on documents to authenticate them. By giving this
ring to Haman, the king bestowed on him the power to authenticate royal
decrees.