1
A copy of the letter which Jeremiah sent to
those who were being led captive to Babylon by the king of the Babylonians, to convey
to them what God had commanded him: 
For the sins you committed before God, you are being led captive to Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Babylonians.
2
When you reach Babylon you will be there many
years, a period seven generations long; after which I will bring you back from
there in peace. 
3
And now in Babylon you will see borne upon
men's shoulders gods of silver and gold and wood, which cast fear upon the
pagans. 
4
Take care that you yourselves do not imitate
their alien example and stand in fear of them, 
5
when you see the crowd before them and behind
worshiping them. Rather, say in your hearts, "You, O LORD, are to be
worshiped!"; 
6
for my angel is with you, and he is the
custodian of your lives. 
7
Their tongues are smoothed by woodworkers; they
are covered with gold and silver-but they are a fraud, and cannot speak. 
8
People bring gold, as to a maiden in love with
ornament, 
9
and furnish crowns for the heads of their gods.
Then sometimes the priests take the silver and gold from their gods and spend
it on themselves, 
10
or give part of it to the harlots on the
terrace. They trick them out in garments like men, these gods of silver and
gold and wood; 
11
but though they are wrapped in purple clothing,
they are not safe from corrosion or insects. 
12
They wipe their faces clean of the house dust
which is thick upon them. 
13
Each has a scepter, like the human ruler of a
district; but none does away with those that offend against it. 
14
Each has in its right hand an axe or dagger, but
it cannot save itself from war or pillage. Thus it is known they are not gods;
do not fear them. 
15
As useless as one's broken tools 
16
are their gods, set up in their houses; their
eyes are full of dust from the feet of those who enter. 
17
Their courtyards are walled in like those of a
man brought to execution for a crime against the king; the priests reinforce
their houses with gates and bars and bolts, lest they be carried off by
robbers. 
18
They light more lamps for them than for
themselves, yet not one of these can they see. 
19
They are like any beam in the house; it is said
their hearts are eaten away. Though the insects out of the ground consume them
and their garments, they do not feel it. 
20
Their faces are blackened by the smoke of the
house. 
21
Bats and swallows alight on their bodies and on
their heads; and cats as well as birds. 
22
Know, therefore, that they are not gods, and do
not fear them. 
23
Despite the gold that covers them for
adornment, unless someone wipes away the corrosion, they do not shine; nor did
they feel anything when they were molded. 
24
They are bought at any price, and there is no
spirit in them. 
25
Having no feet, they are carried on men's
shoulders, displaying their shame to all; and those who worship them are put to
confusion 
26
because, if they fall to the ground, the
worshipers must raise them up. They neither move of themselves if one sets them
upright, nor come upright if they fall; but one puts gifts beside them as
beside the dead. 
27
Their priests resell their sacrifices for their
own advantage. Even their wives cure parts of the meat, but do not share it
with the poor and the weak; 
28
the menstruous and women in childbed handle
their sacrifices. Knowing from this that they are not gods, do not fear them. 
29
How can they be called gods? For women bring
the offerings to these gods of silver and gold and wood; 
30
and in their temples the priests squat with
torn tunic and with shaven hair and beard, and with their heads uncovered. 
31
They shout and wail before their gods as others
do at a funeral banquet. 
32
The priests take some of their clothing and put
it on their wives and children. 
33
Whether they are treated well or ill by anyone,
they cannot requite it; they can neither set up a king nor remove him. 
34
Similarly, they cannot give anyone riches or
coppers; if one fails to fulfill a vow to them, they cannot exact it of him. 
35
They neither save a man from death, nor deliver
the weak from the strong. 
36
To no blind man do they restore his sight, nor
do they save any man in an emergency. 
37
They neither pity the widow nor benefit the
orphan. 
38
These gilded and silvered wooden statues are
like stones from the mountains; and their worshipers will be put to shame. 
39
How then can it be thought or claimed that they
are gods? 
40
Even the Chaldeans themselves have no respect
for them; for when they see a deaf mute, incapable of speech, they bring
forward Bel and ask the god to make noise, as though the man could understand; 
41
and they are themselves unable to reflect and
abandon these gods, for they have no sense. 
42
And their women, girt with cords, sit by the
roads, burning chaff for incense; 
43
and whenever one of them is drawn aside by some
passer-by who lies with her, she mocks her neighbor who has not been dignified
as she has, and has not had her cord broken. 
44
All that takes place around these gods is a
fraud: how then can it be thought or claimed that they are gods? 
45
They are produced by woodworkers and
goldsmiths, and they are nothing else than what these craftsmen wish them to
be. 
46
Even those who produce them are not long-lived;
47
how then can what they have produced be gods?
They have left frauds and opprobrium to their successors. 
48
For when war or disaster comes upon them, the
priests deliberate among themselves where they can hide with them. 
49
How then can one not know that these are
no-gods, which do not save themselves either from war or from disaster? 
50
They are wooden, gilded and silvered; they will
later be known for frauds. To all peoples and kings it will be clear that they
are not gods, but human handiwork; and that God's work is not in them. 
51
Who does not know that they are not gods? 
52
They set no king over the land, nor do they
give men rain. 
53
They neither vindicate their own rights, nor do
they recover what is unjustly taken, for they are unable; 
54
they are like crows between heaven and earth.
For when fire breaks out in the temple of these wooden or gilded or silvered
gods, though the priests flee and are safe, they themselves are burnt up in the
fire like beams. 
55
They cannot resist a king, or enemy forces. 
56
How then can it be admitted or thought that they
are gods? are safe from neither thieves nor bandits, these wooden and silvered
and gilded gods; 
57
those who seize them strip off the gold and the
silver, and go away with the clothing that was on them, and they cannot help
themselves. 
58
How much better to be a king displaying his
valor, or a handy tool in a house, the joy of its owner, than these false gods;
or the door of a house, that keeps safe those who are within, rather than these
false gods; or a wooden post in a palace, rather than these false gods! 
59
The sun and moon and stars are bright, and
obedient in the service for which they are sent. 
60
Likewise the lightning, when it flashes, is a
goodly sight; and the same wind blows over all the land. 
61
The clouds, too, when commanded by God to
proceed across the whole world, fulfill the order; 
62
and fire, sent from on high to burn up the
mountains and the forests, does what has been commanded. But these false gods
are not their equal, whether in beauty or in power; 
63
so that it is unthinkable, and cannot be
claimed, that they are gods. They can neither execute judgment, nor benefit
man. 
64
Know, therefore, that they are not gods, and do
not fear them. 
65
Kings they neither curse nor bless. 
66
They show the nations no signs in the heavens,
nor are they brilliant like the sun, nor shining like the moon. 
67
The beasts which can help themselves by fleeing
to shelter are better than they are. 
68
Thus in no way is it clear to us that they are
gods; so do not fear them. 
69
For like a scarecrow in a cucumber patch, that
is no protection, are their wooden, gilded, silvered gods. 
70
Just like a thornbush in a garden on which
perches every kind of bird, or like a corpse hurled into darkness, are their
silvered and gilded wooden gods. 
71
From the rotting of the purple and the linen
upon them, it can be known that they are not gods; they themselves will in the
end be comsumed, and be a disgrace in the land. 
72
The better for the just man who has no idols:
he shall be far from disgrace! 