Foreword
Foreword
Many
important truths have been handed down to us through the law, the prophets, and
the later authors; and for these the instruction and wisdom of Israel merit
praise. Now, those who are familiar with these truths must not only understand
them themselves but, as lovers of wisdom, be able, in speech and in writing, to
help others less familiar. Such a one was my grandfather, Jesus, who, having
devoted himself for a long time to the diligent study of the law, the prophets,
and the rest of the books
[1]
 of our ancestors, and having
developed a thorough familiarity with them, was moved to write something
himself in the nature of instruction and wisdom, in order that those who love
wisdom might, by acquainting themselves with what he too had written, make even
greater progress in living in conformity with the divine law. 
You therefore are now
invited to read it in a spirit of attentive good will, with indulgence for any
apparent failure on our part, despite earnest efforts, in the interpretation of
particular passages. For words spoken originally in Hebrew are not as effective
when they are translated into another language. That is true not only of this
book but of the law itself, the prophets and the rest of the books, which
differ no little when they are read in the original.
I arrived
in Egypt in the thirty-eighth year of the reign of King Euergetes,
[2]
 and while there, I found a reproduction of our valuable
teaching.
[3]
 I therefore considered myself in duty bound to
devote some diligence and industry to the translation of this book. Many
sleepless hours of close application have I devoted in the interval to
finishing the book for publication, for the benefit of those living abroad who
wish to acquire wisdom and are disposed to live their lives according to the
standards of the law.
1
 The law, the prophets, and the rest
of the books: the Sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament written before the
time of Sirach, according to the threefold division of the present Hebrew
Bible. 
2
 Thirty-eighth . . . Euregetes: 132
B.C. The reference is to Ptolemy VII, Physkon Euergetes II (170-163; 145-117
B.C.).
3
 Reproduction . . . teaching: may
refer to the Septuagint (Greek) translation of Hebrew wisdom writings predating
Sirach.