1
[1]
 The greatest among his brethren, the glory of
his people, was SIMON the priest, son of Jochanan, In whose time the house of
God was renovated, in whose days the temple was reinforced. 
2
In his time also the wall was built with
powerful turrets for the temple precincts; 
3
In his time the reservoir was dug, the pool
with a vastness like the sea's. 
4
He protected his people against brigands and
strengthened his city against the enemy. 
5
How splendid he was as he appeared from the
tent, as he came from within the veil! 
6
Like a star shining among the clouds, like the
full moon at the holyday season; 
7
Like the sun shining upon the temple, like the
rainbow appearing in the cloudy sky; 
8
Like the blossoms on the branches in
springtime, like a lily on the banks of a stream; Like the trees of Lebanon in
summer, 
9
like the fire of incense at the sacrifice; Like
a vessel of beaten gold, studded with precious stones; 
10
Like a luxuriant olive tree thick with fruit,
like a cypress standing against the clouds; 
11
Vested in his magnificent robes, and wearing
his garments of splendor, As he ascended the glorious altar and lent majesty to
the court of the sanctuary. 
12
When he received the sundered victims from the
priests while he stood before the sacrificial wood, His brethren ringed him
about like a garland, like a stand of cedars on Lebanon; 
13
All the sons of Aaron in their dignity
clustered around him like poplars, With the offerings to the LORD in their
hands, in the presence of the whole assembly of Israel. 
14
Once he had completed the services at the altar
with the arranging of the sacrifices for the Most High, 
15
And had stretched forth his hand for the cup,
to offer blood of the grape, And poured it out at the foot of the altar, a
sweet-smelling odor to the Most High God, 
16
The sons of Aaron would sound a blast, the
priests, on their trumpets of beaten metal; A blast to resound mightily as a
reminder before the Most High. 
17
Then all the people with one accord would
quickly fall prostrate to the ground In adoration before the Most High, before
the Holy One of Israel. 
18
Then hymns would re-echo, and over the throng
sweet strains of praise resound. 
19
All the people of the land would shout for joy,
praying to the Merciful One, As the high priest completed the services at the
altar by presenting to God the sacrifice due; 
20
Then coming down he would raise his hands over
all the congregation of Israel. The blessing of the LORD would be upon his
lips, the name of the LORD would be his glory. 
21
Then again the people would lie prostrate to
receive from him the blessing of the Most High. 
22
[2]
 And now, bless the God of all, who has done
wondrous things on earth; Who fosters men's growth from their mother's womb,
and fashions them according to his will! 
23
May he grant you joy of heart and may peace
abide among you; 
24
May his goodness toward us endure in Israel as
long as the heavens are above. 
25
[3]
[4]
 My whole being loathes
two nations, the third is not even a people: 
26
[5]
 Those who live in Seir and Philistia, and the
degenerate folk who dwell in Shechem. 
27
[6]
 Wise instruction, appropriate proverbs, I have
written in this book, I, Jesus, son of Eleazar, son of Sirach, as they gushed
forth from my heart's understanding. 
28
Happy the man who meditates upon these things,
wise the man who takes them to heart! 
29
If he puts them into practice, he can cope with
anything, for the fear of the LORD is his lamp. 
1
 [1-21] The son of Jochanan here
mentioned was Simon II, in whose time as high priest (219-196 B.C.) great works
were accomplished for the benefit of public worship and welfare
(
⇒
 Sirach 50:1-4). The author, a contemporary of
this high priest, describes in great detail and by numerous comparisons the
impression of awful majesty received, the lofty joy aroused, at sight of the
high priest fully vested entering the sanctuary, ascending the altar
(
⇒
 Sirach 50:6-11), and, in the presence of the
whole assembly of Israel, encircled by assistant priests bearing offerings,
sacrificing the burnt offering on the Day of Atonement, while the trumpets
blast and the people bow down in adoration of the Most High
(
⇒
 Sirach 50:12-17). The hymnody, the joyful shouts
of the multitude, and finally the high priest's blessing, in which he
pronounces-once only in the year, on this occasion - the holy name of Yahweh,
climax the description of this most solemn Jewish liturgical function
(
⇒
 Sirach 50:18-21). 
2
 [22-24] Praise and thanksgiving are
given to God for his wondrous works, and a blessing is invoked on man that he
may enjoy peace and gladness of heart and the abiding goodness of the Most
High.
3
 [25-26] The author's abhorrence of
the pagan Edomites (Idumeans), Philistines and Samaritans can be understood in
the light of Old Testament thinking, which does not always distinguish between
hatred of evildoers and hatred of the evil they do.
4
 [25] Not even a people: the
Samaritans.
5
 [26] Seir: Mount Seir in the
territory of the Edomites. Shechem: a city in Samaria.
6
 [27-29] These verses contain the
subscription of the author, Jesus, son of Eleazar, son of Sirach, to his long
and beautiful treatise on wisdom as applying to all of human life, integrating
it under the direction of the fear of the Lord.