Introduction
Introduction
The Book of
Sirach derives its name from the author, Jesus, son of Eleazar, son of Sirach
(
⇒
 Sirach 50:27). Its earliest title seems to have
been "Wisdom of the Son of Sirach." The designation "Liber
Ecclesiasticus," meaning "Church Book," appended to some Greek
and Latin manuscripts was due to the extensive use which the church made of
this book in presenting moral teaching to catechumens and to the faithful.
The author, a sage who
lived in Jerusalem, was thoroughly imbued with love for the law, the
priesthood, the temple, and divine worship. As a wise and experienced observer
of life he addressed himself to his contemporaries with the motive of helping
them to maintain religious faith and integrity through study of the holy books,
and through tradition.
The book contains numerous
maxims formulated with care, grouped by affinity, and dealing with a variety of
subjects such as the individual, the family, and the community in their
relations with one another and with God. It treats of friendship, education,
poverty and wealth, the law, religious worship, and many other matters which
reflect the religious and social customs of the time.
Written in Hebrew between
200 and 175 B.C., the text was translated into Greek sometime after 132 B.C. by
the author's grandson, who also wrote a Foreword which contains information
about the book, the author, and the translator himself. Until the close of the
nineteenth century Sirach was known only in translations, of which this Greek
rendering was the most important. From it the Latin version was made. Between
1896 and 1900, again in 1931, and several times since 1956, manuscripts were
discovered containing in all about two thirds of the Hebrew text, which agrees
substantially with the Greek. One such text, from Masada, is pre-Christian in
date.
Though not included in the
Hebrew Bible after the first century A.D., nor accepted by Protestants, the
Book of Sirach has always been recognized by the Catholic Church as divinely
inspired and canonical. The Foreword, though not inspired, is placed in the
Bible because of its antiquity and importance.
The contents of Sirach are
of a discursive nature, not easily divided into separate parts. Sir 1-43 deal
largely with moral instruction; 
⇒
44:1-
⇒
 50:24 contain a eulogy of the
heroes of Israel and some of the patriarchs. There are two appendices in which
the author expresses his gratitude to God, and appeals to the unlearned to
acquire true wisdom.
The Church uses the Book of
Sirach extensively in her liturgy.