1
[1]
 On the fifth day of the sixth month, in the
sixth year, as I was sitting in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before
me, the hand of the Lord GOD fell upon me there. 
2
[2]
 I looked up and saw a form that looked like a
man. Downward from what seemed to be his waist, there was fire; from his waist
upward there seemed to be a brightness like the sheen of electrum. He stretched
out what appeared to be a hand and seized me by the hair of my head. . . . 
4
I saw there the glory of the God of Israel,
like the vision I had seen in the plain. The cherubim were stationed to the
right of the temple; 
20
these were the living creatures I had seen
beneath the God of Israel by the river Chebar, whom I now recognized to be
cherubim. 
21
Each ohad four faces and four wings; something
like human hands were under their wings. 
22
Their faces looked just like those I had seen
by the river Chebar; each one went straight forward. 
14
Each had four faces: the first face was that of
an ox, the second that of a man, the third that of a lion, and the fourth that
of an eagle. 
15
Such were the living creatures I had seen by
the river Chebar. 
9
I also saw four wheels beside them, one wheel
beside each cherub; the wheels appeared to have the luster of chrysolite stone.
10
All four of them seemed to be made the same, as
though they were a wheel within a wheel. 
11
When they moved, they went in any one of their
four directions without veering as they moved; for in whichever direction they
were faced, they went straight toward it without veering as they moved. 
12
The rims of the four wheels were full of eyes
all around. 
13
I heard the wheels given the name
"wheelwork." 
16
When the cherubim moved, the wheels went beside
them; when the cherubim lifted their wings to rise from the earth, even then
the wheels did not leave their sides. 
17
When they stood still, the wheels stood still;
when they rose, the wheels rose with them; for the living creatures' spirit was
in them. 
1
I looked and saw in the firmament above the cherubim
what appeared to be sapphire stone; something like a throne could be seen upon
it. 
2
[3]
 He said to the man dressed in linen: Go within
the wheelwork under the cherubim; fill both your hands with burning coals from
among the cherubim, then scatter them over the city. As I looked on, he
entered. The glory of the God of Israel had gone up from the cherubim, upon
which it had been, to the threshold of the temple. 
3
As the man entered, the cloud filled the inner
court, 
4
and the glory of the LORD rose from over the
cherubim to the threshold of the temple; the temple was filled with the cloud,
and all the court was bright with the glory of the LORD. 
5
The noise of the wings of the cherubim could be
heard as far as the outer court; it was like the voice of God the Almighty when
he speaks. 
6
When he had commanded the man dressed in linen
to take fire from within the wheelwork, among the cherubim, the man entered and
stood by one of the wheels. 
7
Thereupon its cherub stretched out his hand
toward the fire that was among the cherubim. He took up some of it and put it
in the hands of the one dressed in linen, who took it and came out. 
8
(Something like human hands could be seen under
the wings of the cherubim.) 
18
Then the glory of the LORD left the threshold
of the temple and rested upon the cherubim. 
19
These lifted their wings, and I saw them rise
from the earth, the wheels rising along with them. They stood at the entrance
of the eastern gate of the LORD'S house, and the glory of the God of Israel was
up above them. 
1
[
⇒
 10:1-11:25] In
these chapters of the current Hebrew text, several visions involving the temple
of Jerusalem were combined to form a single continuous vision. The
redistribution of verses in this translation is an attempt to separate the
original visions. 
⇒
10:1(8:1,
2, 4) have been
transposed here from Ezekial 8. [1] The fifth day of the sixth month, in the
sixth year: September 17, 592 B.C. 
2
 [2] The dots suppose the omission
of some words describing the prophet's being transported in his visions to the
court of the temple.
3
 [2] (2)The burning coals within the
wheelwork under God's throne, a sign of the divine presence (cf
⇒
 Ezekiel 28:14; 
⇒
 Psalm
18:13), symbolize the judgment to be visited on the city.