1
[1]
 Thus the word of the LORD came to me: 
2
[2]
 Son of man, turn toward Gog (the land of Magog),
the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him: 
3
Thus says the Lord GOD: See! I am coming at
you, Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal. 
4
I will lead you forth with all your army,
horses and riders all handsomely outfitted, a great horde with bucklers and
shields, all of them carrying swords: 
5
Persia, Cush, and Put with them (all with
shields and helmets), 
6
Gomer with all its troops, Beth-togarmah from
the recesses of the north with all its troops, many peoples with you. 
7
Prepare yourself, be ready, you and all your
horde assembled about you, and be at my disposal. 
8
After many days you will be mustered (in the
last years you will come) against a nation which has survived the sword, which
has been assembled from many peoples (on the mountains of Israel which were
long a ruin), which has been brought forth from among the peoples and all of
whom now dwell in security. 
9
You shall come up like a sudden storm,
advancing like a cloud to cover the earth, you and all your troops and the many
peoples with you. 
10
Thus says the Lord GOD: At that time thoughts
shall arise in your mind, and you shall devise an evil scheme: 
11
"I will go up against a land of open
villages and attack the peaceful people who are living in security, all of them
living without walls, having neither bars nor gates, 
12
[3]
 to plunder and pillage, turning my hand
against the ruins that were repeopled and against a people gathered from the
nations, a people concerned with cattle and goods, who dwell at the navel of
the earth." 
13
Sheba and Dedan, the merchants of Tarshish and
all her young lions shall ask you: "Is it for plunder that you have come?
Is it for pillage that you have summoned your horde, to carry off silver and
gold, to take away cattle and goods, to seize much plunder?" 
17
Thus says the Lord GOD: It is of you that I
spoke in ancient times through my servants, the prophets of Israel, who
prophesied in those days that I would bring you against them. 
18
But on that day, the day when Gog invades the
land of Israel, says the Lord GOD, my fury shall be aroused. In my anger 
19
and in my jealousy, in my fiery wrath, I swear:
On that day there shall be a great shaking upon the land of Israel. 
20
Before me shall tremble the fish of the sea and
the birds of the air, the beasts of the field and all the reptiles that crawl
upon the ground, and all men who are on the land. Mountains shall be
overturned, and cliffs shall tumble, and every wall shall fall to the ground. 
21
Against him I will summon every terror, says
the Lord GOD, every man's sword against his brother. I will hold judgment with
him in pestilence and bloodshed; 
22
flooding rain and hailstones, fire and
brimstone, I will rain upon him, upon his troops, and upon the many peoples
with him. 
23
I will prove my greatness and holiness and make
myself known in the sight of many nations; thus they shall know that I am the
LORD. 
14
Therefore prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog:
Thus says the Lord GOD: When my people Israel are dwelling in security, will
you not bestir yourself 
15
and come from your home in the recesses of the
north, you and many peoples with you, all mounted on horses, a great horde and
a mighty army? 
16
You shall come up against my people Israel like
a cloud covering the land. In the last days I will bring you against my land,
that the nations may know of me, when in their sight I prove my holiness
through you, O Gog. 
1
[
⇒
 38:1-
⇒
 39:20] These
three oracles against Gog may refer either to a specific foreign invasion in
the future, or to the apocalyptic struggle between good and evil at the end of
time. By some they are ascribed to a later author than Ezekiel, who lived after
the exile and the return to Palestine. 
2
 [2] Gog: the name is almost
certainly a symbolic one taken from that of Gyges, king of Lydia, whether or
not the prophet has a specific person in mind. The gloss Magog may be an
Akkadian expression, mat-Gog, "the land of Gog." Meshech and Tubal, as
well as Gomer and Beth-togarmah (
⇒
 Ezekiel 38:6),
were countries around the Black Sea, the northernmost countries known to the
Hebrews: the north (cf also 
⇒
 Ezekiel 38:22(15))
was the traditional direction from which invasion was expected; cf
⇒
 Jeremiah 1:13-15.
3
 [12] Who dwell at the navel of the
earth: the people of Israel (cf 
⇒
38:15(18); 
⇒
 Ezekiel 5:5). Many ancient
peoples spoke of their own homelands as "the navel," that is, the
center of the earth.