Introduction
Introduction
Ezekiel's complex
character makes him one of the most interesting figures in Israelite prophecy.
In many ways he resembles the more primitive type of prophet represented by
Elijah and Elisha; yet he clearly depends on all his predecessors in prophecy,
and his teaching is a development of theirs. His unique contribution to the
history of prophetism lies in his manifest interest in the temple and the
liturgy, an interest paralleled in no other prophet - not even Jeremiah who,
like Ezekiel, was also a priest. Particularly because of this interest,
Ezekiel's influence on postexilic religion was enormous, and not without reason
has he been called "the father of Judaism." This has resulted in his
prophecies reaching us with the evident marks of editing and addition by the
post-exilic circles that shared his intense interest. However, we may be sure
that in this book we have throughout what is in substance the prophet's own
work.
Ezekiel became a prophet in
Babylon - the first prophet to
receive the call to prophesy outside the Holy Land. As
one of the exiles deported by Nebuchadnezzar in 597, his first task was to
prepare his fellow countrymen in Babylon for the final destruction of
Jerusalem, which they believed to be inviolable. Accordingly, the first part of
his book consists of reproaches for Israel's past and present sins and the
confident prediction of yet a further devastation of the land of promise and a
more general exile. In 587, when Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem, Ezekiel
was vindicated before his unbelieving compatriots.
After this time, Ezekiel's
message changes. From now on his prophecy is characterized by the promise of
salvation in a new covenant, and he is anxious to lay down the conditions
necessary to obtain it. Even as Jeremiah had believed, Ezekiel thought that the
exiles were the hope of Israel's restoration, once God's allotted time for the
Exile had been accomplished. His final eight chapters are an utopian vision of
the Israel of the future, rid of its past evils and reestablished firmly under
the rule of the Lord. The famous vision of the dry bones in chapter 37
expresses his firm belief in a forthcoming restoration, Israel rising to new
life from the graveyard of Babylon. But Ezekiel's new covenant, like
Jeremiah's, was to see its true fulfillment only in the New Testament.
Perhaps no other prophet
has stressed the absolute majesty of God as Ezekiel does. This appears not only
in the tremendous vision by the river Chebar with which his prophecy opens, but
throughout the book. Ultimately, says Ezekiel, whatever God does to or for man
is motivated by zeal for his own holy name. The new heart and the new spirit
which must exist under the new covenant cannot be the work of man; they too
must be the work of God. By such teachings he helped prepare for the New
Testament doctrine of salvation through grace.
The Book of Ezekiel is
divided as follows:
I.          
Call
of the Prophet (
⇒
1:1-
⇒
 3:27) 
II.          
Before
the Siege of Jerusalem (
⇒
4:1-
⇒
 24:27) 
III.          
Prophecies
against Foreign Nations (
⇒
 Ezekiel 25:1-
⇒
 32:32)
IV.          
Salvation
for Israel (
⇒
33:1-
⇒
 39:29) 
V.          
The
New Israel (
⇒
40:1-
⇒
 48:35) 