1
Thus the word of the LORD came to me: 
2
[1]
 Son of man, look southward, preach toward the
south, and prophesy against the forest of the southern land. 
3
Hear the word of the LORD! you shall say to the
southern forest. Thus says the Lord GOD: See! I am kindling a fire in you that
shall devour all trees, the green as well as the dry. The blazing flame shall
not be quenched, but from south to north every face shall be scorched by it. 
4
Everyone shall see that I, the LORD, have
kindled it, and it shall not be quenched. 
5
But I said, "Alas! Lord GOD, they say to
me, 'Is not this the one who is forever spinning parables?'" 
6
Then the word of the LORD came to me: 
7
Son of man, look toward Jerusalem, preach
against their sanctuary, and prophesy against the land of Israel, 
8
[2]
 saying to the land of Israel: Thus says the
LORD: See! I am coming at you; I will draw my sword from its sheath and cut off
from you the virtuous and the wicked. 
9
Thus my sword shall leave its sheath against
everyone from south to north, 
10
and everyone shall know that I, the LORD, have
drawn my sword from its sheath, and it shall not be sheathed again. 
11
As for you, son of man, groan! with shattered
strength groan bitterly while they look on. 
12
[3]
 And when they ask you, "Why are you
groaning?", you shall say: Because of a report; when it comes every heart
shall fail, every hand shall fall helpless, every spirit shall be daunted, and
every knee shall run with water. See, it is coming, it is here! says the Lord
GOD. 
13
Thus the word of the LORD came to me: 
14
Son of man, prophesy! say: Thus says the LORD:
A sword, a sword has been sharpened, a sword, a sword has been burnished: 
15
To work slaughter has it been sharpened, to
flash lightning has it been burnished. Why should I now withdraw it? You have
spurned the rod and every judgment! 
16
I have given it over to the burnisher that he
might hold it in his hand, A sword sharpened and burnished to be put in the
hand of a slayer. 
17
Cry out and wail, son of man, for it is
destined for my people; It is for all the princes of Israel, victims of the
sword with my people. Therefore, slap your thigh, 
[4]
18
for the sword has been tested; and why should
it not be so? says the Lord GOD, since you have spurned the rod. 
19
As for you, son of man, prophesy, brushing one
hand against the other: While the sword is doubled and tripled, this sword of
slaughter, This great sword of slaughter which threatens all around, 
20
That every heart may tremble; for many will be
the fallen. At all their gates I have appointed the sword for slaughter,
Fashioned to flash lightning, burnished for slaughter. 
21
Cleave to the right! destroy! to the left!
wherever your edge is turned. 
22
[5]
 Then I, too, shall brush one hand against the
other and wreak my fury. I, the LORD, have spoken. 
23
Thus the word of the LORD came to me: 
24
Son of man, make for yourself two roads over
which the sword of the king of Babylon can come. Both roads shall lead out from
the same land. Then put a signpost at the head of each road, 
25
so that the sword can come to Rabbah of the
Ammonites or to Judah's capital, Jerusalem. 
26
[6]
 For at the fork where the two roads divide
stands the king of Babylon, divining; he has shaken the arrows, inquired of the
teraphim, inspected the liver. 
27
[7]
 In his right hand is the divining arrow marked
"Jerusalem," bidding him to give the order for slaying, to raise his
voice in the battle cry, to post battering rams at the gates, to cast up a ramp,
to build a siege tower. 
28
In their eyes this is but a lying oracle; yet
they are bound by the oaths they have sworn, and the arrow taken in hand marks
their guilt. 
29
Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have
drawn attention to your guilt, with your crimes laid bare and your sinfulness
in all your wicked deeds revealed (because attention has been drawn to you),
you shall be taken in hand. 
30
And as for you, depraved and wicked prince of Israel,
whose day is coming when your life of crime will be ended, 
31
thus says the Lord GOD: Off with the turban and
away with the crown! Nothing shall be as it was! Up with the low and down with
the high! 
32
Twisted, twisted, twisted will I leave it; it
shall not be the same until he comes who has the claim against the city; and to
him I will hand it over. 
33
[8]
 As for you, son of man, prophesy: Thus says
the Lord GOD against the Ammonites and their insults: A sword, a sword is drawn
for slaughter, burnished to consume and to flash lightning, 
34
because you planned with false visions and
lying divinations to lay it on the necks of depraved and wicked men whose day
has come when their crimes are at an end. 
35
Return it to its sheath! In the place where you
were created, in the land of your origin, I will judge you. 
36
I will pour out my indignation upon you,
breathing my fiery wrath upon you, I will hand you over to ravaging men,
artisans of destruction. 
37
You shall be fuel for the fire, your blood
shall flow throughout the land. You shall not be remembered, for I, the LORD,
have spoken. 
1
 [2-4] The southern kingdom, Judah,
is likened to a forest about to be burned; cf 
⇒
 Jeremiah
21:14. 
2
 [8] Cut off from you the virtuous
and the wicked: a more complete devastation of Jerusalem than that described in
⇒
 Ezekiel 9:6.
3
 [12] A report: the news of the fall
of Jerusalem; cf 
⇒
 Ezekiel 33:21- 22.
4
 [17] Slap your thigh: a gesture
signifying grief and dread.
5
 [22] Brush one hand against the
other: a gesture signifying the rejection of responsibility; cf
⇒
 Ezekiel 22:13; 
⇒
 Numbers
24:10.
6
 [26] Three forms of divination are
mentioned: arrow divination, consisting in the use of differently marked arrows
extracted or shaken from a case at random; the consultation of the teraphim or
household idols, and liver divination, scrutiny of the configurations of the
livers of newly slaughtered animals, a common form of divination in
Mesopotamia.
7
 [27-28] An arrow marked
"Jerusalem" is picked out, which marks the guilt of the city's
inhabitants for having broken their oath of allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar.
8
 [33] (33-37) In the preceding
section Nebuchadnezzar is represented as deciding whether to attack Jerusalem
or Rabbath-Ammon. As it happened, Jerusalem was chosen for attack; later,
however, the Chaldeans also invaded Ammon. The present oracle against Ammon is
inserted here, rather than in Ezekial 25-32, in order to complement the oracle
against Jerusalem.