3
[1]
 Spirit lifted me up in the air and brought me
in divine visions to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the north gate, where stood
the statue of jealousy which stirs up jealousy. 
5
[2]
 He said to me: Son of man, look toward the
north! I looked toward the north and saw northward of the gate the altar of the
statue of jealousy. 
6
Son of man, he asked me, do you see what they
are doing? Do you see the great abominations that the house of Israel is
practicing here, so that I must depart from my sanctuary? But you shall see
still greater abominations! 
7
Then he brought me to the entrance of the
court, where I saw there was a hole in the wall. 
8
Son of man, he ordered, dig through the wall. I
dug through the wall and saw a door. 
9
Enter, he said to me, and see the abominable
evils which they are doing here. 
10
[3]
 I entered and saw that all around upon the
wall were pictured the figures of all kinds of creeping things and loathsome
beasts (all the idols of the house of Israel). 
11
Before these stood seventy of the elders of the
house of Israel, among whom stood Jaazaniah, son of Shaphan, each of them with
his censer in his hand, and the fragrance of the incense was rising upward. 
12
Then he said to me: Do you see, son of man,
what each of these elders of the house of Israel is doing in his idol room?
They think: "The LORD cannot see us; the LORD has forsaken the land."
13
He continued: You shall see still greater
abominations that they are practicing. 
14
[4]
 Then he brought me to the entrance of the
north gate of the temple, and I saw sitting there the women who were weeping
for Tammuz. 
15
Then he said to me: Do you see this, son of
man? You shall see other abominations, greater than these! 
16
[5]
 Then he brought me into the inner court of the
LORD'S house, and there at the door of the LORD'S temple, between the vestibule
and the altar, were about twenty-five men with their backs to the LORD'S temple
and their faces toward the east; they were bowing down to the sun. 
17
[6]
 Do you see, son of man? he asked me. Is it
such a trivial matter for the house of Judah to do the abominable things they
have done here - for they have filled the land with violence, and again and
again they have provoked me - that now they must also put the branch to my
nose? 
18
Therefore I in turn will act furiously: I will
not look upon them with pity nor will I show mercy. 
1
 [3] The statue of jealousy which
stirs up jealousy: the statue which provokes the Lord's jealousy for his honor.
This was probably the statue of the goddess Asherah erected by the wicked King
Manasseh (cf 
⇒
 2 Kings 21:7; 
⇒
 2
Chron 33:7, 
⇒
 15). Though it had been
removed by King Josiah (
⇒
 2 Kings 23:6), it had no
doubt been set up again in the repaganizing of Jerusalem that followed on
Josiah's death. 
2
 [5] He: an angel accompanies
Ezekiel in these visions and represents the voice of the Lord; cf
⇒
 Ezekiel 40:3-4.
3
 [10] Creeping things and loathsome
beasts: probably Egyptian deities, which were represented in animal form.
During the last days of Jerusalem King Zedekiah was allied with Egypt, trusting
in it for protection against the Chaldeans.
4
 [14] Weeping for Tammuz: the
withering of trees and plants in autumn was thought to be due to the descent of
Tammuz, the Babylonian god of fertility, to the nether world of the dead; this
descent was bewailed by the women.
5
 [16] Bowing down to the sun: sun
worship had been made an important part of Judahite idolatry by the impious
kings; cf 
⇒
 2 Kings 23:11.
6
 [17] Put the branch to my nose: the
meaning is uncertain. Perhaps it refers to an Egyptian practice imported into
Judah: the Egyptian sun god Re is pictured with a vine branch at his nose,
signifying the transfer of creative power (divine breath) to living things.
Such rites were abominable to the Lord.