Introduction
Introduction
The title 
given to this book is the Greek translation of the Hebrew name Qoheleth
meaning, perhaps, "one who convokes an assembly." The book, however,
does not consist of public addresses, but is a treatise, more or less logically
developed, on the vanity of all things. Reflections in prose and aphorisms in
verse are intermingled in Ecclesiastes, which contains, besides, an and an
epilogue.
The book is concerned with
the purpose and value of human life. While admitting the existence of a divine
plan, it considers such a plan to be hidden from man, who seeks happiness
without ever finding it here below (
⇒
 Eccl 3:11;
⇒
 8:7, 
⇒
 17). Ecclesiastes
applies his "Vanity of vanities" to everything "under the
sun," even to that wisdom which seeks to find at last a semblence of good
in the things of the world. Merit does not yield happiness for it is often
tried by suffering. Riches and pleasures do not avail. Existence is monotonous,
enjoyment fleeting and vain; darkness quickly follows. Life, then, is an enigma
beyond human ability to solve.
While Ecclesiastes concedes
that there is an advantage for man in the enjoyment of certain legitimate
pleasures lest he lapse into pessimism and despair, he nevertheless considers
this indulgence also vanity unless man returns due thanks to the Creator who
has given him all. Under this aspect, earthly wisdom would rise to the higher
level of true spiritual wisdom. This true wisdom is not found "under the
sun" but is perceived only by the light of faith, inasmuch as it rests
with God, who is the final Judge of the good and the bad, and whose reign
endures forever. The Epilogue gives the clue to this thought
(
⇒
 Eccl 12:13, 
⇒
 14).
The moral teaching of the
book is imperfect, like the Old Testament itself (
⇒
 Hebrews
7:19), yet it marks an advance in the development of the doctrine of
divine retribution. While rejecting the older solution of earthly rewards and
punishments, Ecclesiastes looks forward to a more lasting one. The clear answer
to the problem was to come with the light of Christ's teaching concerning
future life.
The author of the book was
a teacher of popular wisdom (
⇒
 Eccl 12:9). Qoheleth
was obviously only his literary name. Because he is called "David's son,
king in Jerusalem," it was commonly thought that he was King Solomon. Such
personation, however, was but a literary device to lend greater dignity and
authority to the book - a circumstance which does not in any way impugn its
inspired character. The Epilogue seems to have been written by an editor,
probably a disciple of Qoheleth. The entire work differs considerably in
language and style from earlier books of the Old Testament. It reflects a late
period of Hebrew, and was probably written about three centuries before
Christ.