1
There was a famine in the land (distinct from
the earlier one that had occurred in the days of Abraham), and Isaac went down
to Abimelech, king of the Philistines in Gerar. 
2
The LORD appeared to him and said: "Do not
go down to Egypt, but continue to camp wherever in this land I tell you. 
3
Stay in this land, and I will be with you and
bless you; for to you and your descendants I will give all these lands, in
fulfillment of the oath that I swore to your father Abraham. 
4
I will make your descendants as numerous as the
stars in the sky and give them all these lands, and in your descendants all the
nations of the earth shall find blessing - 
5
this because Abraham obeyed me, keeping my mandate
(my commandments, my ordinances, and my instructions)." 
6
[1]
 So Isaac settled in Gerar. 
7
When the men of the place asked questions about
his wife, he answered, "She is my sister." He was afraid, if he called
her his wife, the men of the place would kill him on account of Rebekah, since
she was very beautiful. 
8
But when he had been there for a long time,
Abimelech, king of the Philistines, happened to look out of a window and was
surprised to see Isaac fondling his wife Rebekah. 
9
He called for Isaac and said: "She must
certainly be your wife! How could you have said, 'She is my sister'?"
Isaac replied, "I thought I might lose my life on her account." 
10
"How could you do this to us!"
exclaimed Abimelech. "It would have taken very little for one of the men
to lie with your wife, and you would have thus brought guilt upon us!" 
11
Abimelech therefore gave this warning to all
his men: "Anyone who molests this man or his wife shall forthwith be put
to death." 
12
[2]
 Isaac sowed a crop in that region and reaped a
hundredfold the same year. Since the LORD blessed him, 
13
he became richer and richer all the time, until
he was very wealthy indeed. 
14
He acquired such flocks and herds, and so many
work animals, that the Philistines became envious of him. 
15
(The Philistines had stopped up and filled with
dirt all the wells that his father's servants had dug back in the days of his
father Abraham.) 
16
So Abimelech said to Isaac, "Go away from
us; you have become far too numerous for us." 
17
Isaac left there and made the Wadi Gerar his
regular campsite. 
18
(Isaac reopened the wells which his father's
servants had dug back in the days of his father Abraham and which the
Philistines had stopped up after Abraham's death; he gave them the same names
that his father had given them.) 
19
But when Isaac's servants dug in the wadi and
reached spring water in their well, 
20
[3]
 the shepherds of Gerar quarreled with Isaac's
servants, saying, "The water belongs to us!" So the well was called
Esek, because they had challenged him there. 
21
[4]
 Then they dug another well, and they quarreled
over that one too; so it was called Sitnah. 
22
When he had moved on from there, he dug still
another well; but over this one they did not quarrel. It was called Rehoboth,
because he said, "The LORD has now given us ample room, and we shall
flourish in the land." 
23
From there Isaac went up to Beer-sheba. 
24
The same night the LORD appeared to him and
said: "I am the God of your father Abraham. You have no need to fear,
since I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the
sake of my servant Abraham." 
25
So he built an altar there and invoked the LORD
by name. After he had pitched his tent there, his servants began to dig a well
nearby. 
26
Abimelech had meanwhile come to him from Gerar,
accompanied by Ahuzzath, his councilor, and Phicol, the general of his army. 
27
Isaac asked them, "Why have you come to
me, seeing that you hate me and have driven me away from you?" 
28
They answered: "We are convinced that the
LORD is with you, so we propose that there be a sworn agreement between our two
sides - between you and us. Let us make a pact with you: 
29
you shall not act unkindly toward us, just as
we have not molested you, but have always acted kindly toward you and have let
you depart in peace. Henceforth, 'The LORD'S blessing be upon you!'" 
30
Isaac then made a feast for them, and they ate
and drank. 
31
Early the next morning they exchanged oaths.
Then Isaac bade them farewell, and they departed from him in peace. 
32
That same day Isaac's servants came and brought
him news about the well they had been digging; they told him, "We have
reached water!" 
33
[5]
 He called it Shibah; hence the name of the
city, Beer-sheba, to this day. 
34
[6]
 When Esau was forty years old, he married
Judith, daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, daughter of Elon the
Hivite. 
35
But they became a source of embitterment to
Isaac and Rebekah. 
1
 [6-11] The Yahwist's version of the
wife-sister episode at Gerar; the Elohist's version (
⇒
20:1-18) is connected with Abraham and Sarah.
2
 [12-33] The Yahwist's version of
the story about the wells at Beer-sheba; again, the Elohist's version
(
⇒
 Genesis 21:22-23) is connected with Abraham. A
redactor joined the two accounts by means of the parenthetical
⇒
 Genesis 26:15, 
⇒
 18.
3
 [20] Esek: "challenge."
4
 [21] Sitnah:
"opposition"; one might expect the text to be continued by some such
words as "because they were in opposition there."
5
 [33] Shibah: "seven," for
the sake of a closer assonance with Beer-sheba; but the present version of the story
says nothing about there being seven wells there as implied in
⇒
 Genesis 21:28-31. The Greek version understood
the Hebrew text more logically as shebua, "oath," in keeping with the
present story.
6
 [34-35] These verses from the
Priestly source, which have no logical connection with the preceding stories,
serve as an introduction to the following section on Esau's loss of his
birthright by suggesting a motivation for this in Isaac's and Rebekah's dislike
for Esau's Canaanite wives. 