1
The LORD said to Moses: 
2
[1]
 "Order the Israelites to expel from camp
every leper, and everyone suffering from a discharge, and everyone who has
become unclean by contact with a corpse. 
3
Male and female alike, you shall compel them to
go out of the camp; they are not to defile the camp in which I dwell." 
4
The Israelites obeyed the command that the LORD
had given Moses; they expelled them from the camp. 
5
[2]
 The LORD said to Moses, 
6
"Tell the Israelites: If a man (or a
woman) commits a fault against his fellow man and wrongs him, thus breaking
faith with the LORD, 
7
he shall confess the wrong he has done, restore
his ill-gotten goods in full, and in addition give one fifth of their value to
the one he has wronged. 
8
[3]
 However, if the latter has no next of kin to
whom restoration of the ill-gotten goods can be made, the goods to be restored
shall be the LORD'S and shall fall to the priest; this is apart from the
atonement ram with which the priest makes amends for the guilty man. 
9
Likewise, every sacred contribution that the
Israelites are bound to make shall fall to the priest. 
10
Each Israelite man may dispose of his own
sacred contributions; they become the property of the priest to whom he gives
them." 
11
The LORD said to Moses, 
12
"Speak to the Israelites and tell them: If
a man's wife goes astray and becomes unfaithful to him 
13
by having intercourse with another man, though
her husband has not sufficient evidence of the fact, so that her impurity
remains unproved for lack of a witness who might have caught her in the act; 
14
or if a man is overcome by a feeling of
jealousy that makes him suspect his wife, whether she was actually impure or
not: 
15
he shall bring his wife to the priest and shall
take along as an offering for her a tenth of an ephah of barley meal. However,
he shall not pour oil on it nor put frankincense over it, since it is a cereal
offering of jealousy, a cereal offering for an appeal in a question of guilt. 
16
"The priest shall first have the woman
come forward and stand before the LORD. 
17
[4]
 In an earthen vessel he shall meanwhile put
some holy water, as well as some dust that he has taken from the floor of the
Dwelling. 
18
[5]
 Then, as the woman stands before the LORD, the
priest shall uncover her head and place in her hands the cereal offering of her
appeal, that is, the cereal offering of jealousy, while he himself shall hold
the bitter water that brings a curse. 
19
Then he shall adjure the woman, saying to her,
'If no other man has had intercourse with you, and you have not gone astray by
impurity while under the authority of your husband, be immune to the curse
brought by this bitter water. 
20
But if you have gone astray while under the
authority of your husband and have acted impurely by letting a man other than
your husband have intercourse with you' - 
21
[6]
 so shall the priest adjure the woman with this
oath of imprecation - 'may the LORD make you an example of malediction and
imprecation among your people by causing your thighs to waste away and your
belly to swell! 
22
[7]
 May this water, then, that brings a curse,
enter your body to make your belly swell and your thighs waste away!' And the
woman shall say, 'Amen, amen!' 
23
The priest shall put these imprecations in
writing and shall then wash them off into the bitter water, 
24
which he is to have the woman drink, so that it
may go into her with all its bitter curse. 
25
But first he shall take the cereal offering of
jealousy from the woman's hand, and having waved this offering before the LORD,
shall put it near the altar, 
26
where he shall take a handful of the cereal
offering as its token offering and burn it on the altar. Only then shall he
have the woman drink the water. 
27
Once she has done so, if she has been impure
and unfaithful to her husband, this bitter water that brings a curse will go
into her, and her belly will swell and her thighs will waste away, so that she
will become an example of imprecation among her people. 
28
If, however, the woman has not defiled herself,
but is still pure, she will be immune and will still be able to bear children. 
29
"This, then, is the law for jealousy: When
a woman goes astray while under the authority of her husband and acts impurely,
30
or when such a feeling of jealousy comes over a
man that he becomes suspicious of his wife, he shall have her stand before the
LORD, and the priest shall apply this law in full to her. 
31
[8]
 The man shall be free from guilt, but the
woman shall bear such guilt as she may have." 
1
 [2] For the laws regarding victims
of leprosy, see Lev 13-14; those suffering from a discharge, Lev 15; the
unclean by contact with a corpse, 
⇒
19:11-22; 
⇒
 Lev 21:1-4.
2
 [5-10] The basic law on unjust possession
is given in 
⇒
 Lev 5:14-19. The new item here
concerns the case where the injured party has died and left no heirs, in which
case the restitution must be made to the priest.
3
 [8] Next of kin: literally
"redeemer," a technical term denoting the nearest relative, upon whom
devolved the obligation of "redeeming" the family property, in order
to keep it within the family. Cf 
⇒
 Lev 25:25;
⇒
 Ruth 4:1-6.
4
 [17] Holy water: water from the
laver that stood in the court of the Dwelling.
5
 [18] Appeal: by which she invokes
the Lord and refers her case to his decision.
6
 [21] An example of malediction and
imprecation: the woman's name would be used in curses and oaths to invoke a
similar misfortune on another person or on oneself. Cf
⇒
 Isaiah 65:15; 
⇒
 Jeremiah
29:22.
7
 [22] Amen: a Hebrew word meaning,
"certainly, truly," used to give assent to a statement, a curse, a
blessing, a prayer, or the like; in this sense of "so be it," the
Christian liturgy also uses it after prayers and blessings.
8
 [31] Free from guilt:by fulfilling
his obligation of obtaining a decision in the matter. 