1
The LORD said to Moses, 
2
"Tell Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, to
remove the censers from the embers; and scatter the fire some distance away, 
3
[1]
 for these sinners have consecrated the censers
at the cost of their lives. Have them hammered into plates to cover the altar,
because in being presented before the LORD they have become sacred. In this way
they shall serve as a sign to the Israelites." 
4
So Eleazar the priest had the bronze censers of
those burned during the offering hammered into a covering for the altar, 
5
in keeping with the orders which the LORD had
given him through Moses. This cover was to be a reminder to the Israelites that
no layman, no one who was not a descendant of Aaron, should approach the altar
to offer incense before the LORD, lest he meet the fate of Korah and his band. 
6
The next day the whole Israelite community
grumbled against Moses and Aaron, saying, "It is you who have slain the
LORD'S people." 
7
But while the community was deliberating
against them, Moses and Aaron turned toward the meeting tent, and the cloud now
covered it and the glory of the LORD appeared. 
8
Then Moses and Aaron came to the front of the
meeting tent, 
9
and the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, 
10
"Depart from this community, that I may
consume them at once." But they fell prostrate. 
11
Then Moses said to Aaron, "Take your
censer, put fire from the altar in it, lay incense on it, and bring it quickly
to the community to make atonement for them; for wrath has come forth from the
LORD and the blow is falling." 
12
Obeying the orders of Moses, Aaron took his
censer and ran in among the community, where the blow was already falling on
the people. Then, as he offered the incense and made atonement for the people, 
13
standing there between the living and the dead,
the scourge was checked. 
14
Yet fourteen thousand seven hundred died from
the scourge, in addition to those who died because of Korah. 
15
When the scourge had been checked, Aaron
returned to Moses at the entrance of the meeting tent. 
16
The LORD now said to Moses, 
17
[2]
 "Speak to the Israelites and get one
staff from them for each ancestral house, twelve staffs in all, one from each
of their tribal princes. Mark each man's name on his staff; 
18
[3]
 and mark Aaron's name on Levi's staff, for the
head of Levi's ancestral house shall also have a staff. 
19
Then lay them down in the meeting tent, in
front of the commandments, where I meet you. 
20
There the staff of the man of my choice shall
sprout. Thus will I suppress from my presence the Israelites' grumbling against
you." 
21
So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and their
princes gave him staffs, twelve in all, one from each tribal prince; and
Aaron's staff was with them. 
22
Then Moses laid the staffs down before the LORD
in the tent of the commandments. 
23
The next day, when Moses entered the tent,
Aaron's staff, representing the house of Levi, had sprouted and put forth not
only shoots, but blossoms as well, and even bore ripe almonds! 
24
Moses thereupon brought out all the staffs from
the LORD'S presence to the Israelites. After each prince identified his own
staff and took it, 
25
the LORD said to Moses, "Put back Aaron's
staff in front of the commandments, to be kept there as a warning to the
rebellious, so that their grumbling may cease before me; if it does not, they
will die." 
26
And Moses did as the LORD had commanded him. 
27
[4]
 Then the Israelites cried out to Moses,
"We are perishing; we are lost, we are all lost! 
28
Every time anyone approaches the Dwelling of
the LORD, he dies! Are we to perish to the last man?" 
1
 [3] Whatever was brought into
intimate contact with something sacred shared in its sacredness. See note on
⇒
 Numbers 19:20.
2
 [17] (17)The staff was not merely
an article of practical use, but also a symbol of authority; cf
⇒
 Genesis 49:10; 
⇒
24:17; 
⇒
 Jeremiah 48:17. Hence, the staff
of a leader of a tribe was considered the emblem of his tribe; in fact, certain
Hebrew words for "staff" also mean "tribe." Perhaps for
this reason, to avoid confusion, the author here uses the term "ancestral
house" instead of the ordinary word for "tribe."
3
 [18] (18)Levi's staff: it is not
clear whether this is considered as one of the twelve mentioned in the
preceding verse, or as a thirteenth staff. Sometimes Levi is reckoned as one of
the twelve tribes (e.g., 
⇒
 Deut 27:12-13), but more
often the number twelve is arrived at by counting the two sub-tribes of Joseph,
i.e., Ephraim and Manasseh, as distinct tribes. In this passage also it seems
probable that the tribe of Levi is considered apart from the other twelve.
4
 [27] (27,28)Logically these two
verses belong immediately after 
⇒
 Numbers 16:35. 