Introduction
Introduction
The last four books
of the Hebrew canon are Ezra, Nehemiah, 1 and 2 Chronicles, in that order.
Originally, however, Ezra and Nehemiah followed the Books of Chronicles, and
formed with them a unified historical work so homogeneous in spirit that one
usually speaks of a single author for the four books. He is called "the
Chronicler." The treatment of Ezra-Nehemiah as a single book by the
earliest chroniclers was undoubtedly due to the fact that in ancient times the
two books were put under the one name-Ezra. The combined work Ezra-Nehemiah is
our most important literary source for the formation of the Jewish religious
community after the Babylonian exile. This is known as the period of the
Restoration, and the two men most responsible for the reorganization of Jewish
life at this time were Ezra and Nehemiah.
In the present state of the
Ezra-Nehemiah text, there are several dislocations of large sections so that
the chronological or logical sequence is disrupted. The major instances are
pointed out in the footnotes. Although Ezra appears before Nehemiah in this
work, it seems probable that Nehemiah's activity preceded his.
What is known of Ezra and
his work is due almost exclusively to Ezr 7-10 (the "Ezra Memoirs")
and to Neh 8-9. Strictly speaking, the term "Ezra Memoirs" should be
used only of that section in which Ezra speaks in the first person, i.e.,
⇒
 Ezra 7:27-
⇒
 9:15.
Compare the ""Nehemiah Memoirs'' in 
⇒
 Nehemiah
1:1-
⇒
 7:72a;
⇒
 11:1, 2;
⇒
 12:27-43; 
⇒
 13:4-31.
The Chronicler combined this material with other sources at his disposal. The
personality of Ezra is less known than that of Nehemiah. Ben Sirach, in his
praise of the fathers, makes no mention of Ezra. The genealogy of Ezra
(
⇒
 Ezra 7:1-5) traces his priesthood back to Aaron,
brother of Moses. This was the accepted way of establishing the legality of
one's priestly office. He is also called a scribe, well-versed in the law of
Moses (
⇒
 Ezra 7:6), indicating Ezra's dedication to
the study of the Torah, which he sought to make the basic rule of life in the
restored community. It was in religious and cultic reform rather than in
political affairs that Ezra made his mark as a postexilic leader. Jewish
tradition holds him in great honor; the Talmud even regards him as a second
Moses, claiming that the Torah would have been given to Israel through Ezra had
not Moses preceded him.
Ezra is sometimes accused
of having been a mere legalist who gave excessive attention to the letter of
the law. His work, however, should be seen and judged within a specific
historical context. He gave to his people a cohesion and spiritual unity which
prevented the disintegration of the small Jewish community. Had it not been for
the intransigence of Ezra and of those who adopted his ideal, it is doubtful
that Judaism would have so effectively resisted Hellenism, then or in later
centuries. Ezra set the tone of the postexilic community, and it was
characterized by fidelity to the Torah, Judaism's authentic way of life. It is
in this light that we can judge most fairly the work of Ezra during the
Restoration.
The Book of Ezra is divided
as follows:
1.     The Return from Exile
(
⇒
 Ezra 1:1-
⇒
 6:22) 
2.     The Deeds of Ezra
(
⇒
 Ezra 7:1-
⇒
 10:44) 
The following list of the
kings of Persia, with the dates of their reigns, will be useful for dating the
events mentioned in Ezra-Nehemiah:
Cyrus  - 
538-529 B.C.
Cambyses  -  529-521 B.C.
Darius I  -  521-485 B.C.
Xerxes  -  485-464 B.C.
Artaxerxes I  -  464-423 B.C.
Darius II  -  423-404 B.C.
Artaxerxes II  -  404-358 B.C.
Artaxerxes III  -  358-337 B.C.
End of the Persian Empire  -  331 B.C.
(Defeat of Darius III)