1
[1]
 See what love the Father has bestowed on us
that we may be called the children of God. Yet so we are. The reason the world
does not know us is that it did not know him. 
2
Beloved, we are God's children now; what we
shall be has not yet been revealed. We do know that when it is revealed 
[2]
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 
3
Everyone who has this hope based on him makes
himself pure, as he is pure. 
4
Everyone who commits sin commits lawlessness,
for sin is lawlessness. 
[3]
5
You know that he was revealed to take away
sins, and in him there is no sin. 
6
No one who remains in him sins; no one who sins
has seen him or known him. 
7
Children, let no one deceive you. The person
who acts in righteousness is righteous, just as he is righteous. 
8
Whoever sins belongs to the devil, because the
devil has sinned from the beginning. Indeed, the Son of God was revealed to
destroy the works of the devil. 
9
No one who is begotten by God commits sin,
because God's seed remains in him; he cannot sin because he is begotten by God.
[4]
10
In this way, the children of God and the
children of the devil are made plain; no one who fails to act in righteousness
belongs to God, nor anyone who does not love his brother. 
11
[5]
 For this is the message you have heard from the
beginning: we should love one another, 
12
unlike Cain who belonged to the evil one and
slaughtered his brother. Why did he slaughter him? Because his own works were
evil, and those of his brother righteous. 
13
Do not be amazed, (then,) brothers, if the
world hates you. 
14
We know that we have passed from death to life
because we love our brothers. Whoever does not love remains in death. 
15
Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer,
and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him. 
16
The way we came to know love was that he laid
down his life for us; so we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers. 
17
If someone who has worldly means sees a brother
in need and refuses him compassion, how can the love of God remain in him? 
18
Children, let us love not in word or speech but
in deed and truth. 
19
[6]
 (Now) this is how we shall know that we 
[7]
belong to the truth and reassure our hearts before him 
20
in whatever our hearts condemn, for God is
greater than our hearts and knows everything. 
21
Beloved, if (our) hearts do not condemn us, we
have confidence in God 
22
and receive from him whatever we ask, because
we keep his commandments and do what pleases him. 
23
And his commandment is this: we should believe
in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another just as he commanded
us. 
24
Those who keep his commandments remain in him,
and he in them, and the way we know that he remains in us is from the Spirit
that he gave us. 
1
 [1-3] The greatest sign of God's
love is the gift of his Son (
⇒
 John 3:16) that has
made Christians true children of God. This relationship is a present reality
and also part of the life to come; true knowledge of God will ultimately be
gained, and Christians prepare themselves now by virtuous lives in imitation of
the Son. 
2
 [2] When it is revealed: or
"when he is revealed" (the subject of the verb could be Christ).
3
 [4] Lawlessness: a reference to the
activity of the antichrist, so it is expressed as hostility toward God and a
rejection of Christ. The author goes on to contrast the states of sin and
righteousness. Christians do not escape sin but realize that when they sin they
cease to have fellowship with God. Virtue and sin distinguish the children of
God from the children of the devil.
4
 [9] A habitual sinner is a child of
the devil, while a child of God, who by definition is in fellowship with God,
cannot sin. Seed: Christ or the Spirit who shares the nature of God with the
Christian.
5
 [11-18] Love, even to the point of
self-sacrifice, is the point of the commandment. The story of Cain and Abel
(
⇒
 1 John 3:12-15; 
⇒
 Genesis
4:1-16) presents the rivalry of two brothers, in a contrast of evil
and righteousness, where envy led to murder. For Christians, proof of
deliverance is love toward others, after the example of Christ. This includes
concrete acts of charity, out of our material abundance.
6
 [19-24] Living a life of faith in
Jesus and of Christian love assures us of abiding in God no matter what our
feelings may at times tell us. Our obedience gives us confidence in prayer and
trust in God's judgment. This obedience includes our belief in Christ and love
for one another.
7
 [19b-20] This difficult passage may
also be translated "we shall be at peace before him in whatever our hearts
condemn, for . . ." or "and before God we shall convince our hearts,
if our hearts condemn us, that God is greater than our hearts."