1
[1]
 Beloved, do not trust every spirit but test
the spirits to see whether they belong to God, because many false prophets have
gone out into the world. 
2
This is how you can know the Spirit of God:
every spirit that acknowledges Jesus Christ come in the flesh be longs to God, 
3
and every spirit that does not acknowledge
Jesus 
[2]
 does not belong to God. This is the spirit of the
antichrist that, as you heard, is to come, but in fact is already in the world.
4
You belong to God, children, and you have
conquered them, for the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the
world. 
5
They belong to the world; accordingly, their teaching
belongs to the world, and the world listens to them. 
6
We belong to God, and anyone who knows God
listens to us, while anyone who does not belong to God refuses to hear us. This
is how we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of deceit. 
7
[3]
 Beloved, let us love one another, because love
is of God; everyone who loves is begotten by God and knows God. 
8
Whoever is without love does not know God, for
God is love. 
9
In this way the love of God was revealed to us:
God sent his only Son into the world so that we might have life through him. 
10
In this is love: not that we have loved God,
but that he loved us and sent his Son as expiation for our sins. 
11
Beloved, if God so loved us, we also must love
one another. 
12
No one has ever seen God. Yet, if we love one
another, God remains in us, and his love is brought to perfection in us. 
13
[4]
 This is how we know that we remain in him and
he in us, that he has given us of his Spirit. 
14
Moreover, we have seen and testify that the
Father sent his Son as savior of the world. 
15
Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of
God, God remains in him and he in God. 
16
We have come to know and to believe in the love
God has for us. God is love, and whoever remains in love remains in God and God
in him. 
17
In this is love brought to perfection among us,
that we have confidence on the day of judgment because as he is, so are we in
this world. 
18
There is no fear in love, but perfect love
drives out fear because fear has to do with punishment, and so one who fears is
not yet perfect in love. 
19
We love because he first loved us. 
20
If anyone says, "I love God," but
hates his brother, he is a liar; for whoever does not love a brother whom he
has seen cannot love God 
[5]
 whom he has not seen. 
21
This is the commandment we have from him:
whoever loves God must also love his brother. 
1
 [1-6] Deception is possible in
spiritual phenomena and may be tested by its relation to Christian doctrine (cf
⇒
 1 Cor 12:3): those who fail to acknowledge Jesus
Christ in the flesh are false prophets and belong to the antichrist. Even
though these false prophets are well received in the world, the Christian who
belongs to God has a greater power in the truth. 
2
 [3] Does not acknowledge Jesus:
some ancient manuscripts add "Christ" and/or "to have come in
the flesh" (cf 
⇒
 1 John 4:2), and others read
"every spirit that annuls (or severs) Jesus."
3
 [7-12] Love as we share in it
testifies to the nature of God and to his presence in our lives. One who loves
shows that one is a child of God and knows God, for God's very being is love;
one without love is without God. The revelation of the nature of God's love is
found in the free gift of his Son to us, so that we may share life with God and
be delivered from our sins. The love we have for one another must be of the
same sort: authentic, merciful; this unique Christian love is our proof that we
know God and can "see" the invisible God.
4
 [13-21] The testimony of the Spirit
and that of faith join the testimony of love to confirm our knowledge of God.
Our love is grounded in the confession of Jesus as the Son of God and the
example of God's love for us. Christian life is founded on the knowledge of God
as love and on his continuing presence that relieves us from fear of judgment
(
⇒
 1 John 4:16-18). What Christ is gives us
confidence, even as we live and love in this world. Yet Christian love is not
abstract but lived in the concrete manner of love for one another.
5
 [20] Cannot love God: some ancient
manuscripts read "how can he love . . . ?"