1
[1]
 Very soon afterward, Lysias, guardian and
kinsman of the king and head of the government, being greatly displeased at
what had happened, 
2
mustered about eighty thousand infantry and all
his cavalry and marched against the Jews. His plan was to make Jerusalem a
Greek settlement; 
3
to levy tribute on the temple, as he did on the
sanctuaries of the other nations; and to put the high priesthood up for sale
every year. 
4
He did not take God's power into account at
all, but felt exultant confidence in his myriads of foot soldiers, his
thousands of horsemen, and his eighty elephants. 
5
So he invaded Judea, and when he reached
Beth-zur, a fortified place about twenty miles from Jerusalem, launched a
strong attack against it. 
6
When Maccabeus and his men learned that Lysias was
besieging the strongholds, they and all the people begged the Lord with
lamentations and tears to send a good angel to save Israel. 
7
Maccabeus himself was the first to take up
arms, and he exhorted the others to join him in risking their lives to help
their kinsmen. Then they resolutely set out together. 
8
Suddenly, while they were still near Jerusalem,
a horseman appeared at their head, clothed in white garments and brandishing
gold weapons. 
9
Then all of them together thanked God for his
mercy, and their hearts were filled with such courage that they were ready to
assault not only men, but the most savage beasts, yes, even walls of iron. 
10
Now that the Lord had shown his mercy toward
them, they advanced in battle order with the aid of their heavenly ally. 
11
Hurling themselves upon the enemy like lions,
they laid low eleven thousand foot soldiers and sixteen hundred horsemen, and
put all the rest to flight. 
12
Most of those who got away were wounded and
stripped of their arms, while Lysias himself escaped only by shameful flight. 
13
But Lysias was not a stupid man. He reflected
on the defeat he had suffered, and came to realize that the Hebrews were
invincible because the mighty God was their ally. He therefore sent a message 
14
persuading them to settle everything on just
terms, and promising to persuade the king also, and to induce him to become
their friend. 
15
Maccabeus, solicitous for the common good,
agreed to all that Lysias proposed; and the king, on his part, granted in
behalf of the Jews all the written requests of Maccabeus to Lysias. 
16
These are the terms of the letter which Lysias
wrote to the Jews: "Lysias sends greetings to the Jewish people. 
17
John and Absalom, your envoys, have presented
your signed communication and asked about the matters contained in it. 
18
Whatever had to be referred to the king I
called to his attention, and the things that were acceptable he has granted. 
19
If you maintain your loyalty to the government,
I will endeavor to further your interests in the future. 
20
On the details of these matters I have
authorized my representatives, as well as your envoys, to confer with you. 
21
[2]
 Farewell." The year one hundred and
forty-eight, the twenty-fourth of Dioscorinthius. 
22
The king's letter read thus: "King
Antiochus sends greetings to his brother Lysias. 
23
Now that our father has taken his place among
the gods, we wish the subjects of our kingdom to be undisturbed in conducting
their own affairs. 
24
We understand that the Jews do not agree with
our father's policy concerning Greek customs but prefer their own way of life.
They are petitioning us to let them retain their own customs. 
25
Since we desire that this people too should be
undisturbed, our decision is that their temple be restored to them and that
they live in keeping with the customs of their ancestors. 
26
Accordingly, please send them messengers to
give them our assurances of friendship, so that, when they learn of our
decision, they may have nothing to worry about but may contentedly go about
their own business." 
27
The king's letter to the people was as follows:
"King Antiochus sends greetings to the Jewish senate and to the rest of
the Jews. 
28
If you are well, it is what we desire. We too
are in good health. 
29
Menelaus has told us of your wish to return
home and attend to your own affairs. 
30
Therefore, those who return by the thirtieth of
Xanthicus will have our assurance of full permission 
31
to observe their dietary laws and other laws,
just as before, and none of the Jews shall be molested in any way for faults
committed through ignorance. 
32
I have also sent Menelaus to reassure you. 
33
[3]
 Farewell." In the year one hundred and
forty-eight, the fifteenth of Xanthicus. 
34
The Romans also sent them a letter as follows:
"Quintus Memmius and Titus Manius, legates of the Romans, send greetings
to the Jewish people. 
35
Whatever Lysias, kinsman of the king, has
granted you, we also approve. 
36
But the matters on which he passed judgment
should be submitted to the king. As soon as you have considered them, send
someone to us with your decisions so that we may present them to your
advantage, for we are on our way to Antioch. 
37
Make haste, then, to send us those who can
inform us of your intentions. 
38
[4]
 Farewell." In the year one hundred and
forty-eight, the fifteenth of Xanthicus. 
1
 [1-12] The defeat of Lysias at
Beth-zur probably occurred before the purification of the temple; cf
⇒
 1 Macc 4:26-35. 
2
 [21] The year one hundred and
forty-eight: 164 B.C. The reading of the name of the month and its position in
the calendar are uncertain.
3
 [33] The date, which is the same as
the date of the Romans' letter (v 38), cannot be correct. The king's letter
must be connected with the peace treaty of the year 149 of the Seleucid era, i.
e., 163 B.C. Perhaps the mention of the month of Xanthicus in the body of the
letter (
⇒
 2 Macc 11:30) caused the date of the
Romans' letter to be transferred to this one.
4
 [38] The date is March 12, 164 B.C.