1
When Nicanor learned that Judas and his
companions were in the territory of Samaria, he decided to attack them in all
safety on the day of rest. 
2
The Jews who were forced to follow him pleaded,
"Do not massacre them in that way, like a savage barbarian, but show
respect for the day which the All-seeing has exalted with holiness above all
other days." 
3
At this the thrice-sinful wretch asked if there
was a ruler in heaven who prescribed the keeping of the sabbath day. 
4
When they replied that there was indeed such a
ruler in heaven, the living LORD himself, who commanded the observance of the
sabbath day, 
5
he said, "I, on my part, am ruler on
earth, and my orders are that you take up arms and carry out the king's
business." Nevertheless he did not succeed in carrying out his cruel plan.
6
[1]
 In his utter boastfulness and arrogance
Nicanor had determined to erect a public monument of victory over Judas and his
men. 
7
But Maccabeus remained confident, fully
convinced that he would receive help from the LORD. 
8
He urged his men not to fear the enemy, but
mindful of the help they had received from Heaven in the past, to expect that
now, too, victory would be given them by the Almighty. 
9
[2]
 By encouraging them with words from the law
and the prophets, and by reminding them of the battles they had already won, he
filled them with fresh enthusiasm. 
10
Having stirred up their courage, he gave his
orders and pointed out at the same time the perfidy of the Gentiles and their
violation of oaths. 
11
When he had armed each of them, not so much
with the safety of shield and spear as with the encouragement of noble words,
he cheered them all by relating a dream, a kind of vision, worthy of belief. 
12
[3]
 What he saw was this: Onias, the former high
priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in appearance, gentle in manners,
distinguished in speech, and trained from childhood in every virtuous practice,
was praying with outstretched arms for the whole Jewish community. 
13
Then in the same way another man appeared,
distinguished by his white hair and dignity, and with an air about him of
extraordinary, majestic authority. 
14
[4]
 Onias then said of him, "This is God's
prophet Jeremiah, who loves his brethren and fervently prays for his people and
their holy city." 
15
Stretching out his right hand, Jeremiah
presented a gold sword to Judas. As he gave it to him he said, 
16
"Accept this holy sword as a gift from
God; with it you shall crush your adversaries." 
17
Encouraged by Judas' noble words, which had
power to instill valor and stir young hearts to courage, the Jews determined
not to delay, but to charge gallantly and decide the issue by hand-to-hand
combat with the utmost courage, since their city and its temple with the sacred
vessels were in danger. 
18
They were not so much concerned about their
wives and children or their brothers and kinsmen; their first and foremost fear
was for the consecrated sanctuary. 
19
Those who remained in the city suffered a like
agony, anxious as they were about the battle in the open country. 
20
Everyone now awaited the decisive moment. The
enemy were already drawing near with their troops drawn up in battle line,
their elephants placed in strategic positions, and their cavalry stationed on
the flanks. 
21
Maccabeus, contemplating the hosts before him,
their elaborate equipment, and the fierceness of their elephants, stretched out
his hands toward heaven and called upon the LORD who works miracles; for he
knew that it is not through arms but through the LORD'S decision that victory
is won by those who deserve it. 
22
He prayed to him thus: "You, O LORD, sent
your angel in the days of King Hezekiah of Judea, and he slew a hundred and
eighty-five thousand men of Sennacherib's army. 
23
Sovereign of the heavens, send a good angel now
to spread fear and dread before us. 
24
By the might of your arm may those be struck down
who have blasphemously come against your holy people!" With this he ended
his prayer. 
25
Nicanor and his men advanced to the sound of
trumpets and battle songs. 
26
But Judas and his men met the army with
supplication and prayers. 
27
Fighting with their hands and praying to God
with their hearts, they laid low at least thirty-five thousand, and rejoiced
greatly over this manifestation of God's power. 
28
When the battle was over and they were joyfully
departing, they discovered Nicanor lying there in all his armor; 
29
so they raised tumultuous shouts in their
native tongue in praise of the divine Sovereign. 
30
Then Judas, who was ever in body and soul the
chief defender of his fellow citizens, and had maintained from youth his
affection for his countrymen, ordered Nicanor's head and whole right arm to be
cut off and taken to Jerusalem. 
31
[5]
 When he arrived there, he assembled his
countrymen, stationed the priests before the altar, and sent for those in the
citadel. 
32
He showed them the vile Nicanor's head and the
wretched blasphemer's arm that had been boastfully stretched out against the
holy dwelling of the Almighty. 
33
He cut out the tongue of the godless Nicanor,
saying he would feed it piecemeal to the birds and would hang up the other
wages of his folly opposite the temple. 
34
At this, everyone looked toward heaven and
praised the Lord who manifests his divine power, saying, "Blessed be he
who has kept his own Place undefiled!" 
35
Judas hung up Nicanor's head on the wall of the
citadel, a clear and evident proof to all of the Lord's help. 
36
[6]
 By public vote it was unanimously decreed
never to let this day pass unobserved, but to celebrate it on the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month, called Adar in Aramaic, the eve of Mordecai's Day. 
37
Since Nicanor's doings ended in this way, with
the city remaining in possession of the Hebrews from that time on, I will bring
my own story to an end here too. 
38
If it is well written and to the point, that is
what I wanted; if it is poorly done and mediocre, that is the best I could do. 
39
Just as it is harmful to drink wine alone or
water alone, whereas mixing wine with water makes a more pleasant drink that
increases delight, so a skillfully composed story delights the ears of those
who read the work. Let this, then, be the end. 
1
 [6] Public monument of victory: a
heap of stones covered with the arms and armor of the fallen enemy. 
2
 [9] The law and the prophets: the
first of the three parts of the Hebrew Scriptures, called the sacred books
(
⇒
 1 Macc 12:9).
3
 [12] Onias, the former high priest:
Onias III (
⇒
 2 Macc 3:1-40). Evidently the author
believed that the departed just were in some way alive even before the
resurrection.
4
 [14] Jeremiah: regarded by the
postexilic Jews as one of the greatest figures in their history; cf
⇒
 2 Macc 2:1; 
⇒
 Matthew
16:14. Who . . . prays for his people: a clear belief in the
intercession of the saints.
5
 [31] Those in the citadel:
presumably Jewish soldiers; actually, the citadel was still in the possession
of the Syrians.
6
 [36] Mordecai's Day: the feast of Purim,
celebrated on the fourteenth and fifteenth days of Adar
(
⇒
 Esther 9:17-22).