1
After these agreements were made, Lysias
returned to the king, and the Jews went about their farming. 
2
[1]
 But some of the local governors, Timothy and
Apollonius, son of Gennaeus, as also Hieronymus and Demophon, to say nothing of
Nicanor, the commander of the Cyprians, would not allow them to live in peace. 
3
Some people of Joppa also committed this
outrage: they invited the Jews who lived among them, together with their wives
and children, to embark on boats which they had provided. There was no hint of
enmity toward them; 
4
this was done by public vote of the city. When
the Jews, not suspecting treachery and wishing to live on friendly terms,
accepted the invitation, the people of Joppa took them out to sea and drowned
at least two hundred of them. 
5
As soon as Judas heard of the barbarous deed
perpetrated against his countrymen, he summoned his men; 
6
and after calling upon God, the just judge, he
marched against the murderers of his kinsmen. In a night attack he set the
harbor on fire, burnt the boats, and put to the sword those who had taken
refuge there. 
7
When the gates of the town were shut, he
withdrew, intending to come back later and wipe out the entire population of
Joppa. 
8
On hearing that the men of Jamnia planned to
give like treatment to the Jews who lived among them, 
9
he attacked the Jamnian populace by night,
setting fire to the harbor and the fleet, so that the glow of the flames was
visible as far as Jerusalem, thirty miles away. 
10
[2]
 When the Jews had gone about a mile from there
in the campaign against Timothy, they were attacked by Arabs numbering at least
five thousand foot soldiers, and five hundred horsemen. 
11
After a hard fight, Judas and his companions,
with God's help, were victorious. The defeated nomads begged Judas to make
friends with them and promised to supply the Jews with cattle and to help them
in every other way. 
12
Realizing that they could indeed be useful in
many respects, Judas agreed to make peace with them. After the pledge of
friendship had been exchanged, the Arabs withdrew to their tents. 
13
He also attacked a certain city called Caspin,
fortified with earthworks and ramparts and inhabited by a mixed population of
Gentiles. 
14
Relying on the strength of their walls and
their supply of provisions, the besieged treated Judas and his men with
contempt, insulting them and even uttering blasphemies and profanity. 
15
But Judas and his men invoked the aid of the
great Sovereign of the world, who, in the day of Joshua, overthrew Jericho
without battering-ram or siege machine; then they furiously stormed the
ramparts. 
16
Capturing the city by the will of God, they
inflicted such indescribable slaughter on it that the adjacent pool, which was
about a quarter of a mile wide, seemed to be filled with the blood that flowed
into it. 
17
[3]
 When they had gone on some ninety miles, they
reached Charax, where there were certain Jews known as Toubiani. 
18
But they did not find Timothy in that region,
for he had already departed from there without having done anything except to
leave behind in one place a very strong garrison. 
19
But Dositheus and Sosipater, two of Maccabeus'
captains, marched out and destroyed the force of more than ten thousand men
that Timothy had left in the stronghold. 
20
Meanwhile, Maccabeus divided his army into
cohorts, with a commander over each cohort, and went in pursuit of Timothy, who
had a force of a hundred and twenty thousand foot soldiers and twenty-five
hundred horsemen. 
21
When Timothy learned of the approach of Judas,
he sent on ahead of him the women and children, as well as the baggage, to a
place called Karnion, which was hard to besiege and even hard to reach because
of the difficult terrain of that region. 
22
But when Judas' first cohort appeared, the
enemy was overwhelmed with fear and terror at the manifestation of the
All-seeing. Scattering in every direction, they rushed away in such headlong
flight that in many cases they wounded one another, pierced by the swords of
their own men. 
23
Judas pressed the pursuit vigorously, putting
the sinners to the sword and destroying as many as thirty thousand men. 
24
Timothy himself fell into the hands of the men
under Dositheus and Sosipater; but with great cunning, he asked them to spare
his life and let him go, because he had in his power the parents and relatives
of many of them, and could make these suffer. 
25
When he had fully confirmed his solemn pledge
to restore them unharmed, they let him go for the sake of saving their
brethren. 
26
[4]
 Judas then marched to Karnion and the shrine
of Atargatis, where he killed twenty-five thousand people. 
27
After the defeat and destruction of these, he
moved his army to Ephron, a fortified city inhabited by people of many
nationalities. Robust young men took up their posts in defense of the walls,
from which they fought valiantly; inside were large supplies of machines and
missiles. 
28
But the Jews, invoking the Sovereign who
forcibly shatters the might of his enemies, got possession of the city and
slaughtered twenty-five thousand of the people in it. 
29
[5]
 Then they set out from there and hastened on
to Scythopolis, seventy-five miles from Jerusalem. 
30
But when the Jews who lived there testified to
the good will shown by the Scythopolitans and to their kind treatment even in
times of adversity, 
31
Judas and his men thanked them and exhorted
them to be well disposed to their race in the future also. Finally they arrived
in Jerusalem, shortly before the feast of Weeks. 
32
After this feast called Pentecost, they lost no
time in marching against Gorgias, governor of Idumea, 
33
who opposed them with three thousand foot
soldiers and four hundred horsemen. 
34
In the ensuing battle, a few of the Jews were
slain. 
35
[6]
 A man called Dositheus, a powerful horseman
and one of Bacenor's men, caught hold of Gorgias, grasped his military cloak
and dragged him along by main strength, intending to capture the vile wretch
alive, when a Thracian horseman attacked Dositheus and cut off his arm at the
shoulder. Then Gorgias fled to Marisa. 
36
After Esdris and his men had been fighting for a
long time and were weary, Judas called upon the Lord to show himself their ally
and leader in the battle. 
37
Then, raising a battle cry in his ancestral
language, and with songs, he charged Gorgias' men when they were not expecting
it and put them to flight. 
38
Judas rallied his army and went to the city of
Adullam. As the week was ending, they purified themselves according to custom
and kept the sabbath there. 
39
On the following day, since the task had now
become urgent, Judas and his men went to gather up the bodies of the slain and
bury them with their kinsmen in their ancestral tombs. 
40
But under the tunic of each of the dead they
found amulets sacred to the idols of Jamnia, which the law forbids the Jews to
wear. So it was clear to all that this was why these men had been slain. 
41
They all therefore praised the ways of the
Lord, the just judge who brings to light the things that are hidden. 
42
[7]
 Turning to supplication, they prayed that the
sinful deed might be fully blotted out. The noble Judas warned the soldiers to
keep themselves free from sin, for they had seen with their own eyes what had
happened because of the sin of those who had fallen. 
43
He then took up a collection among all his
soldiers, amounting to two thousand silver drachmas, which he sent to Jerusalem
to provide for an expiatory sacrifice. In doing this he acted in a very
excellent and noble way, inasmuch as he had the resurrection of the dead in
view; 
44
for if he were not expecting the fallen to rise
again, it would have been useless and foolish to pray for them in death. 
45
But if he did this with a view to the splendid
reward that awaits those who had gone to rest in godliness, it was a holy and
pious thought. 
46
Thus he made atonement for the dead that they
might be freed from this sin. 
1
 [2] Apollonius, son of Gennaeus:
not the Apollonius who was the son of Menestheus (
⇒
 2 Macc
4:21). Nicanor: probably distinct from the Nicanor of
⇒
 2 Macc 14:2. 
2
 [10] From there: not from the
aforesaid Jamnia (
⇒
 2 Macc 12:8-9) or Joppa
(
⇒
 2 Macc 12:3-7), but from a place in Transjordan;
⇒
 2 Macc 12:10-26 parallel the account given in
⇒
 1 Macc 5:9-13, 
⇒
 24-54
of Judas' campaign in northern Transjordan.
3
 [17] Certain Jews known as Toubiani:
because they lived "in the land of Tob" (
⇒
 1 Macc
5:13).
4
 [26] Atargatis: a Syrian goddess,
represented by the body of a fish.
5
 [29] Scythopolis: the Greek name of
the city of Beth-shan; cf 
⇒
 1 Macc 5:52.
6
 [35] One of Bacenor's men: certain
ancient witnesses to the text have "one of the Toubiani"; cf
⇒
 2 Macc 12:17.
7
 [42-45] This is the earliest
statement of the doctrine that prayers (
⇒
 2 Macc
12:42) and sacrifices (
⇒
 2 Macc 12:43)
for the dead are efficacious. The statement is made here, however, only for the
purpose of proving that Judas believed in the resurrection of the just
(
⇒
 2 Macc 7:9, 
⇒
 14,
⇒
 23, 
⇒
 36). That is,
he believed that expiation could be made for certain sins of otherwise good
men-soldiers who had given their lives for God's cause. Thus, they could share
in the resurrection. His belief was similar to, but not quite the same as, the
Catholic doctrine of purgatory.