1
Judas Maccabeus and his companions entered the
villages, secretly, summoned their kinsmen, and by also enlisting others who
remained faithful to Judaism, assembled about six thousand men. 
2
They implored the Lord to look kindly upon his
people, who were being oppressed on all sides; to have pity on the temple,
which was profaned by godless men; 
3
to have mercy on the city, which was being
destroyed and about to be leveled to the ground; to hearken to the blood that
cried out to him; 
4
to remember the criminal slaughter of innocent
children and the blasphemies uttered against his name; and to manifest his
hatred of evil. 
5
Once Maccabeus got his men organized, the
Gentiles could not withstand him, for the Lord's wrath had now changed to
mercy. 
6
Coming unexpectedly upon towns and villages, he
would set them on fire. He captured strategic positions, and put to flight a
large number of the enemy. 
7
He preferred the nights as being especially
helpful for such attacks. Soon the fame of his valor spread everywhere. 
8
[1]
 When Philip saw that Judas was gaining ground
little by little and that his successful advances were becoming more frequent,
he wrote to Ptolemy, governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, to come to the aid
of the king's government. 
9
Ptolemy promptly selected Nicanor, son of
Patroclus, one of the Chief Friends, and sent him at the head of at least
twenty thousand armed men of various nations to wipe out the entire Jewish
race. With him he associated Gorgias, a professional military commander,
well-versed in the art of war. 
10
Nicanor planned to raise the two thousand
talents of tribute owed by the king to the Romans by selling captured Jews into
slavery. 
11
So he immediately sent word to the coastal
cities, inviting them to buy Jewish slaves and promising to deliver ninety
slaves for a talent - little did he dream of the punishment that was to fall
upon him from the Almighty. 
12
When Judas learned of Nicanor's advance and
informed his companions about the approach of the army, 
13
the cowardly and those who lacked faith in
God's justice deserted and got away. 
14
But the others sold everything they had left,
and at the same time besought the Lord to deliver those whom the ungodly
Nicanor had sold before even meeting them. 
15
They begged the Lord to do this, if not for
their sake, at least for the sake of the covenants made with their forefathers,
and because they themselves bore his holy, glorious name. 
16
Maccabeus assembled his men, six thousand
strong, and exhorted them not to be panic-stricken before the enemy, nor to
fear the large number of the Gentiles attacking them unjustly, but to fight
courageously, 
17
keeping before their eyes the lawless outrage
perpetrated by the Gentiles against the holy Place and the affliction of the
humiliated city, as well as the subversion of their ancestral way of life. 
18
"They trust in weapons and acts of
daring," he said, "but we trust in almighty God, who can by a mere
nod destroy not only those who attack us, but the whole world." 
19
He went on to tell them of the times when help
had been given their ancestors: both the time of Sennacherib, when a hundred
and eighty-five thousand of his men were destroyed, 
20
and the time of the battle in Babylonia against
the Galatians, when only eight thousand Jews fought along with four thousand Macedonians;
yet when the Macedonians were hard pressed, the eight thousand routed one
hundred and twenty thousand and took a great quantity of booty, because of the
help they received from Heaven. 
21
With such words he encouraged them and made
them ready to die for their laws and their country. Then Judas divided his army
into four, 
22
[2]
 placing his brothers, Simon, Joseph, and
Jonathan, each over a division, assigning to each fifteen hundred men. 
23
(There was also Eleazar.) After reading to them
from the holy book and giving them the watchword, "The Help of God,"
he himself took charge of the first division and joined in battle with Nicanor.
24
With the Almighty as their ally, they killed
more than nine thousand of the enemy, wounded and disabled the greater part of
Nicanor's army, and put all of them to flight. 
25
They also seized the money of those who had
come to buy them as slaves. When they had pursued the enemy for some time, 
26
they were obliged to return by reason of the
late hour, it was the day before the sabbath, and for that reason they could
not continue the pursuit. 
27
They collected the enemy's arms and stripped
them of their spoils, and then observed the sabbath with fervent praise and
thanks to the Lord who kept them safe for that day on which he let descend on
them the first dew of his mercy. 
28
After the sabbath, they gave a share of the
booty to the persecuted and to widows and orphans; the rest they divided among
themselves and their children. 
29
When this was done, they made supplication in
common, imploring the merciful Lord to be completely reconciled with his servants.
30
They also challenged the forces of Timothy and
Bacchides, killed more than twenty thousand of them, and captured some very
high fortresses. They divided the enormous plunder, allotting half to
themselves and the rest to the persecuted, to orphans, widows, and the aged. 
31
They collected the enemies' weapons and
carefully stored them in suitable places; the rest of the spoils they carried
to Jerusalem. 
32
They also killed the commander of Timothy's
forces, a most wicked man, who had done great harm to the Jews. 
33
While celebrating the victory in their
ancestral city, they burned both those who had set fire to the sacred gates and
Callisthenes, who had taken refuge in a little house; so he received the reward
his wicked deeds deserved. 
34
The accursed Nicanor, who had brought the
thousand slave dealers to buy the Jews, 
35
after being humbled through the Lord's help by
those whom he had thought of no account, laid aside his fine clothes and fled
alone across country like a runaway slave, until he reached Antioch. He was
eminently successful in destroying his own army. 
36
So he who had promised to provide tribute for
the Romans by the capture of the people of Jerusalem testified that the Jews
had a champion, and that they were invulnerable for the very reason that they
followed the laws laid down by him. Death of Antiochus 
1
 [8-29, 34-35] This account of the
campaign of Nicanor and Gorgias against Judas is paralleled, with certain
differences, in 
⇒
 1 Macc
3:38-
⇒
 4:24. 
2
 [22] Joseph: called John in
⇒
 1 Macc 2:2; 
⇒
 9:36,
⇒
 38; this paragraph interrupts the story of
Nicanor's defeat, which is resumed in 
⇒
 2 Macc
8:34. The purpose of the author apparently is to group together the
defeats suffered by the Syrians on various occasions. Battles against Timothy
are recounted in 
⇒
 1 Macc 5:37-44;
⇒
 2 Macc 12:10-25; against Bacchides, in
⇒
 1 Macc 7:8-20.