1
The Simon mentioned above as the informer about
the funds against his own country, made false accusation that it was Onias who
threatened Heliodorus and instigated the whole miserable affair. 
2
He dared to brand as a plotter against the
government the man who was a benefactor of the city, a protector of his
compatriots, and a zealous defender of the laws. 
3
When Simon's hostility reached such a point
that murders were being committed by one of his henchmen, 
4
Onias saw that the opposition was serious and
that Apollonius, son of Menestheus, the governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia,
was abetting Simon's wickedness. 
5
So he had recourse to the king, not as an
accuser of his countrymen, but as a man looking to the general and particular
good of all the people. 
6
He saw that, unless the king intervened, it
would be impossible to have a peaceful government, and that Simon would not
desist from his folly. 
7
[1]
 But Seleucus died, and when Antiochus surnamed
Epiphanes succeeded him on the throne, Onias' brother Jason obtained the high
priesthood by corrupt means: 
8
in an interview, he promised the king three
hundred and sixty talents of silver, as well as eighty talents from another
source of income. 
9
[2]
 Besides this he agreed to pay a hundred and
fifty more, if he were given authority to establish a gymnasium and a youth
club for it and to enroll men in Jerusalem as Antiochians. 
10
When Jason received the king's approval and
came into office, he immediately initiated his countrymen into the Greek way of
life. 
11
[3]
 He set aside the royal concessions granted to
the Jews through the mediation of John, father of Eupolemus (that Eupolemus who
would later go on an embassy to the Romans to establish a treaty of friendship
with them); he abrogated the lawful institutions and introduced customs
contrary to the law. 
12
[4]
 He quickly established a gymnasium at the very
foot of the acropolis, where he induced the noblest young men to wear the Greek
hat. 
13
The craze for Hellenism and foreign customs
reached such a pitch, through the outrageous wickedness of the ungodly
pseudo-high-priest Jason, 
14
that the priests no longer cared about the
service of the altar. Disdaining the temple and neglecting the sacrifices, they
hastened, at the signal for the discus-throwing, to take part in the unlawful
exercises on the athletic field. 
15
They despised what their ancestors had regarded
as honors, while they highly prized what the Greeks esteemed as glory. 
16
Precisely because of this, they found themselves
in serious trouble: the very people whose manner of life they emulated, and
whom they desired to imitate in everything, became their enemies and
oppressors. 
17
It is no light matter to flout the laws of God,
as the following period will show. 
18
When the quinquennial games were held at Tyre
in the presence of the king, 
19
the vile Jason sent envoys as representatives
of the Antiochians of Jerusalem, to bring there three hundred silver drachmas for
the sacrifice to Hercules. But the bearers themselves decided that the money
should not be spent on a sacrifice, as that was not right, but should be used
for some other purpose. 
20
[5]
 So the contribution destined by the sender for
the sacrifice to Hercules was in fact applied, by those who brought it, to the
construction of triremes. 
21
[6]
 When Apollonius, son of Menestheus, was sent
to Egypt for the coronation of King Philometor, Antiochus learned that the king
was opposed to his policies; so he took measures for his own security. 
22
After going to Joppa, he proceeded to
Jerusalem. There he was received with great pomp by Jason and the people of the
city, who escorted him with torchlights and acclamations; following this, he
led his army into Phoenicia. 
23
[7]
 Three years later Jason sent Menelaus, brother
of the aforementioned Simon, to deliver the money to the king, and to obtain
decisions on some important matters. 
24
When he had been introduced to the king, he
flattered him with such an air of authority that he secured the high priesthood
for himself, outbidding Jason by three hundred talents of silver. 
25
He returned with the royal commission, but with
nothing that made him worthy of the high priesthood; he had the temper of a
cruel tyrant and the rage of a wild beast. 
26
Then Jason, who had cheated his own brother and
now saw himself cheated by another man, was driven out as a fugitive to the
country of the Ammonites. 
27
Although Menelaus had obtained the office, he
did not make any payments of the money he had promised to the king, 
28
in spite of the demand of Sostratus, the
commandant of the citadel, whose duty it was to collect the taxes. For this
reason, both were summoned before the king. 
29
Menelaus left his brother Lysimachus as his
substitute in the high priesthood, while Sostratus left Crates, commander of
the Cypriots, as his substitute. 
30
[8]
 While these things were taking place, the
people of Tarsus and Mallus rose in revolt, because their cities had been given
as a gift to Antiochis, the king's mistress. 
31
The king, therefore, went off in haste to
settle the affair, leaving Andronicus, one of his nobles, as his deputy. 
32
Then Menelaus, thinking this a good
opportunity, stole some gold vessels from the temple and presented them to
Andronicus; he had already sold some other vessels in Tyre and in the
neighboring cities. 
33
When Onias had clear evidence of the facts, he
made a public protest, after withdrawing to the inviolable sanctuary at Daphne,
near Antioch. 
34
Thereupon Menelaus approached Andronicus
privately and asked him to lay hands on Onias. So Andronicus went to Onias, and
by treacherously reassuring him through sworn pledges with right hands joined,
persuaded him, in spite of his suspicions, to leave the sanctuary. Then,
without any regard for justice, he immediately put him to death. 
35
As a result, not only the Jews, but many people
of other nations as well, were indignant and angry over the unjust murder of
the man. 
36
[9]
 When the king returned from the region of
Cilicia, the Jews of the city, together with the Greeks who detested the crime,
went to see him about the murder of Onias. 
37
Antiochus was deeply grieved and full of pity;
he wept as he recalled the prudence and noble conduct of the deceased. 
38
Inflamed with anger, he immediately stripped
Andronicus of his purple robe, tore off his other garments, and had him led
through the whole city to the very place where he had committed the outrage
against Onias; and there he put the murderer to death. Thus the Lord rendered
him the punishment he deserved. 
39
[10]
 Many sacrilegious thefts had been committed by
Lysimachus in the city with the connivance of Menelaus. When word was spread
that a large number of gold vessels had been stolen, the people assembled in
protest against Lysimachus. 
40
As the crowds, now thoroughly enraged, began to
riot, Lysimachus launched an unjustified attack against them with about three
thousand armed men under the leadership of Auranus, a man as advanced in folly
as he was in years. 
41
Reacting against Lysimachus' attack, the people
picked up stones or pieces of wood or handfuls of the ashes lying there and
threw them in wild confusion at Lysimachus and his men. 
42
As a result, they wounded many of them and even
killed a few, while they put all the rest to flight. The sacrilegious thief
himself they slew near the treasury. 
43
Charges about this affair were brought against
Menelaus. 
44
[11]
 When the king came to Tyre, three men sent by
the senate presented to him the justice of their cause. 
45
But Menelaus, seeing himself on the losing
side, promised Ptolemy, son of Dorymenes, a substantial sum of money if he
would win the king over. 
46
So Ptolemy retired with the king under a
colonnade, as if to get some fresh air, and persuaded him to change his mind. 
47
Menelaus, who was the cause of all the trouble,
the king acquitted of the charges, while he condemned to death those poor men
who would have been declared innocent even if they had pleaded their case
before Scythians. 
48
Thus, those who had prosecuted the case for the
city, for the people, and for the sacred vessels, quickly suffered unjust
punishment. 
49
For this reason, even some Tyrians were
indignant over the crime and provided sumptuously for their burial. 
50
But Menelaus, thanks to the covetousness of the
men in power, remained in office, where he grew in wickedness and became the
chief plotter against his fellow citizens. 
1
 [7] Seleucus died: he was murdered
by Heliodorus. Antiochus Epiphanes was his younger brother. Onias' brother
showed his love for the Greek way of life (
⇒
 2 Macc
4:10) by changing his Hebrew name Joshua, or Jesus, to the Greek name
Jason. 
2
 [9] Youth club: an educational
institution in which young men were trained both in Greek intellectual culture
and in physical fitness. Antiochians: honorary citizens of Antioch, a
Hellenistic city of the Seleucid Kingdom that had a corporation of such
Antiochians, who enjoyed certain political and commerical privileges.
3
 [11] Eupolemus: one of the two
envoys sent to Rome by Judas Maccabeus (
⇒
 1 Macc
8:17).
4
 [12] Since the gymnasium, where the
youth exercised naked (Greek gymnos), lay in the Tyropoeon Valley to the east
of the citadel, it was directly next to the temple on its eastern side. The
Greek hat: a wide-brimmed hat, traditional headgear of Hermes, the patron god
of athletic contests; it formed part of the distinctive costume of the members
of the "youth club."
5
 [20] Triremes: war vessels with
three banks of oars.
6
 [21] Philometor: Ptolemy VI, king
of Egypt, c. 172 to c. 145 B.C.
7
 [23] Menelaus: Jewish high priest
from c. 172 to his execution in 162 B.C. (
⇒
 2 Macc
13:3-8).
8
 [30] Mallus: a city of Cilicia
(
⇒
 2 Macc 4:36) in southeastern Asia Minor, about
thirty miles east of Tarsus.
9
 [36] The city: Antioch. But some
understand the Greek to mean "each city."
10
 [39] The city: Jerusalem. Menelaus was still in Syria.
11
 [44] The senate: the council of
Jewish elders at Jerusalem; cf 
⇒
 1 Macc 12:6.