1
[1]
 Three years later, Judas and his men learned
that Demetrius, son of Seleucus, had sailed into the port of Tripolis with a
powerful army and a fleet, 
2
and that he had occupied the country, after doing
away with Antiochus and his guardian Lysias. 
3
A certain Alcimus, a former high priest, who
had willfully incurred defilement at the time of the revolt, realized that
there was no way for him to salvage his position and regain access to the holy
altar. 
4
So he went to King Demetrius in the year one
hundred and fifty-one and presented him with a gold crown and a palm branch, as
well as some of the customary olive branches from the temple. On that occasion
he kept quiet. 
5
But he found an opportunity to further his mad
scheme when he was invited to the council by Demetrius and questioned about the
dispositions and intentions of the Jews. He replied: 
6
"Those Jews called Hasideans, led by Judas
Maccabeus, are warmongers, who stir up sedition and keep the kingdom from
enjoying peace and quiet. 
7
For this reason, now that I am deprived of my
ancestral dignity, that is to say, the high priesthood, I have come here -  
8
first, out of my genuine concern for the king's
interests, and secondly, out of consideration for my own countrymen, since our
entire nation is suffering great affliction from the unreasonable conduct of
the people just mentioned. 
9
When you have informed yourself in detail on
these matters, O king, act in the interest of our country and its hard-pressed
people with the same gracious consideration that you show toward all. 
10
As long as Judas is around, it is impossible
for the state to enjoy peace." 
11
When he had said this, the other Friends who
were hostile to Judas quickly added fuel to Demetrius' indignation. 
12
The king immediately chose Nicanor, who had
been in command of the elephants, and appointed him governor of Judea. He sent
him off 
13
with orders to put Judas to death, to disperse
his followers, and to set up Alcimus as high priest of the great temple. 
14
[2]
 The Gentiles from Judea, who would have
banished Judas, came flocking to Nicanor, thinking that the misfortunes and
calamities of the Jews would mean prosperity for themselves. 
15
When the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming, and
that the Gentiles were rallying to him, they sprinkled themselves with earth
and prayed to him who established his people forever, and who always comes to
the aid of his heritage. 
16
At their leader's command, they set out at once
and came upon the enemy at the village of Adasa. 
17
Judas' brother Simon had engaged Nicanor, but
because of the sudden appearance of the enemy suffered a slight repulse. 
18
However, when Nicanor heard of the valor of Judas
and his men, and the great courage with which they fought for their country, he
shrank from deciding the issue by bloodshed. 
19
So he sent Posidonius, Theodotus and Mattathias
to arrange an agreement. 
20
After a long discussion of the terms, each
leader communicated them to his troops; and when general agreement was
expressed, they assented to the treaty. 
21
A day was set on which the leaders would meet
by themselves. From each side a chariot came forward and thrones were set in
place. 
22
Judas had posted armed men in readiness at
suitable points for fear that the enemy might suddenly carry out some
treacherous plan. But the conference was held in the proper way. 
23
Nicanor stayed on in Jerusalem, where he did
nothing out of place. He got rid of the throngs of ordinary people who gathered
around him; 
24
but he always kept Judas in his company, for he
had a cordial affection for the man. 
25
He urged him to marry and have children; so
Judas married, settled down, and shared the common life. 
26
When Alcimus saw their friendship for each
other, he took the treaty that had been made, went to Demetrius, and said that
Nicanor was plotting against the state, and that he had appointed Judas, the
conspirator against the kingdom, to be his successor. 
27
Stirred up by the villain's calumnies, the king
became enraged. He wrote to Nicanor, stating that he was displeased with the
treaty, and ordering him to send Maccabeus as a prisoner to Antioch without
delay. 
28
When this message reached Nicanor he was
dismayed, for he hated to break his agreement with a man who had done no wrong.
29
However, there was no way of opposing the king,
so he watched for an opportunity to carry out this order by a stratagem. 
30
But Maccabeus noticed that Nicanor was becoming
cool in his dealings with him, and acting with unaccustomed rudeness when they
met; he concluded that this coldness betokened no good. So he gathered together
a large number of his men, and went into hiding from Nicanor. 
31
When Nicanor realized that he had been
disgracefully outwitted by the man, he went to the great and holy temple, at a
time when the priests were offering the customary sacrifices, and ordered them
to surrender Judas. 
32
As they declared under oath that they did not
know where the wanted man was, 
33
he raised his right hand toward the temple and
swore this oath: "If you do not hand Judas over to me as prisoner, I will
level this shrine of God to the ground; I will tear down the altar, and erect
here a splendid temple to Dionysus." 
34
With these words he went away. The priests
stretched out their hands toward heaven, calling upon the unfailing defender of
our nation in these words: 
35
"Lord of all, though you are in need of
nothing, you have approved of a temple for your dwelling place among us. 
36
Therefore, O holy One, Lord of all holiness,
preserve forever undefiled this house, which has been so recently
purified." 
37
[3]
 A certain Razis, one of the elders of
Jerusalem, was denounced to Nicanor as a patriot. A man highly regarded, he was
called a father of the Jews because of his love for them. 
38
In the early days of the revolt, he had been
convicted of Judaism, and had risked body and life in his ardent zeal for it. 
39
Nicanor, to show his detestation of the Jews,
sent more than five hundred soldiers to arrest him. 
40
He thought that by arresting such a man he
would deal the Jews a hard blow. 
41
But when these troops, on the point of
capturing the tower, were forcing the outer gate and calling for fire to set
the door ablaze, Razis, now caught on all sides, turned his sword against
himself, 
42
preferring to die nobly rather than fall into
the hands of vile men and suffer outrages unworthy of his noble birth. 
43
In the excitement of the struggle he failed to
strike exactly. So while the troops rushed in through the doors, he gallantly
ran up to the top of the wall and with manly courage threw himself down into
the crowd. 
44
But as they quickly drew back and left an
opening, he fell into the middle of the empty space. 
45
Still breathing, and inflamed with anger, he
got up and ran through the crowd, with blood gushing from his frightful wounds.
46
Then, standing on a steep rock, as he lost the
last of his blood, he tore out his entrails and flung them with both hands into
the crowd, calling upon the Lord of life and of spirit to give these back to
him again. Such was the manner of his death. 
1
 [1] Three years later: actually,
Demetrius (I Soter), son of Seleucus (IV), landed at Tripolis in the year 151
of the Seleucid era (
⇒
 1 Macc 14:4), i.e., 162-161
B.C.; cf 
⇒
 1 Macc 7:1-7. 
2
 [14] Who would have banished Judas:
the meaning of the Greek is uncertain; some render it: "who had fled
before Judas."
3
 [37-46] The story of Razis belongs
to the "martyrology" class of literature; it is similar to the
stories in 
⇒
 2 Macc 6:18-
⇒
 7:42.