1
[1]
 In the year one hundred and forty-nine, Judas
and his men learned that Antiochus Eupator was invading Judea with a large
force, 
2
[2]
 and that with him was Lysias, his guardian, who
was in charge of the government. They led a Greek army of one hundred and ten
thousand foot soldiers, fifty-three hundred horsemen, twenty-two elephants, and
three hundred chariots armed with scythes. 
3
Menelaus also joined them, and with great
duplicity kept urging Antiochus on, not for the welfare of his country, but in
the hope of being established in office. 
4
[3]
 But the King of kings aroused the anger of
Antiochus against the scoundrel. When the king was shown by Lysias that
Menelaus was to blame for all the trouble, he ordered him to be taken to Beroea
and executed there in the customary local method. 
5
[4]
 There is at that place a tower seventy-five
feet high, full of ashes, with a circular rim sloping down steeply on all sides
toward the ashes. 
6
A man guilty of sacrilege or notorious for
certain other crimes is brought up there and then hurled down to destruction. 
7
In such a manner was Menelaus, the transgressor
of the law, fated to die; he was deprived even of decent burial. 
8
It was altogether just that he who had
committed so many sins against the altar with its pure fire and ashes should
meet his death in ashes. 
9
The king was advancing, his mind full of savage
plans for inflicting on the Jews worse things than those they suffered in his
father's time. 
10
When Judas learned of this, he urged the people
to call upon the LORD night and day, to help them now, if ever, 
11
when they were about to be deprived of their
law, their country, and their holy temple; and not to allow this nation, which
had just begun to revive, to be subjected again to blasphemous Gentiles. 
12
When they had all joined in doing this, and had
implored the merciful LORD continuously with weeping and fasting and
prostrations for three days, Judas encouraged them and told them to stand
ready. 
13
After a private meeting with the elders, he
decided that, before the king's army could invade Judea and take possession of
the city, the Jews should march out and settle the matter with God's help. 
14
Leaving the outcome to the Creator of the
world, and exhorting his followers to fight nobly to death for the laws, the
temple, the city, the country, and the government, he pitched his camp near
Modein. 
15
[5]
 Giving his men the battle cry "God's
Victory," he made a night attack on the king's pavilion with a picked
force of the bravest young men and killed about two thousand in the camp. They
also slew the lead elephant and its rider. 
16
[6]
 Finally they withdrew in triumph, having filled
the camp with terror and confusion. 
17
Day was just breaking when this was
accomplished with the help and protection of the LORD. 
18
The king, having had a taste of the Jews'
daring, tried to take their positions by a stratagem. 
19
So he marched against Beth-zur, a strong
fortress of the Jews; but he was driven back, checked, and defeated. 
20
Judas then sent supplies to the men inside, 
21
[7]
 but Rhodocus, of the Jewish army, betrayed
military secrets to the enemy. He was found out, arrested, and imprisoned. 
22
The king made a second attempt by negotiating
with the men of Beth-zur. After giving them his pledge and receiving theirs, he
withdrew 
23
and attacked Judas and his men. But he was
defeated. Next he heard that Philip, who was left in charge of the government
in Antioch had rebelled. Dismayed, he parleyed with the Jews, submitted to
their terms, and swore to observe their rights. Having come to this agreement,
he offered a sacrifice, and honored the temple with a generous donation. 
24
[8]
 He approved of Maccabeus and left him as
military and civil governor of the territory from Ptolemais to the region of
the Gerrenes. 
25
When he came to Ptolemais, the people of that
city were angered by the peace treaty; in fact they were so indignant that they
wanted to annul its provisions. 
26
But Lysias took the platform, defended the
treaty as well as he could and won them over by persuasion. After calming them
and gaining their good will, he returned to Antioch. That is how the king's
attack and withdrawal went. 
1
 [1] In the year one hundred and
forty-nine: 163-162 B.C. 
2
 [2] They led: the Greek means
literally "Each (of them) led," but it is unlikely that the author
meant the already immense numbers to be doubled; the numbers are similar to
those in 
⇒
 1 Macc 6:30.
3
 [4] Beroea: the Greek name of
Aleppo.
4
 [5] Ashes: probably smoldering
ashes; the tower resembles the ancient Persian fire towers.
5
 [15] Slew: literally
"stabbed"; the deed was done by Eleazar (
⇒
 1 Macc
6:43-46).
6
 [16] They withdrew in triumph:
according to 
⇒
 1 Macc 6:47 they fled.
7
 [21] Military secrets: probably
about the lack of provisions in the besieged city; cf 
⇒
 1
Macc 6:49.
8
 [24] The Greek text is uncertain
and may be rendered: "He approved of Maccabeus, then left Hegemonides as
governor of the territory. . . ." Gerrenes: probably the inhabitants of
Gerar, southeast of Gaza.