1
Not long after this the king sent an Athenian
senator to force the Jews to abandon the customs of their ancestors and live no
longer by the laws of God; 
2
[1]
 also to profane the temple in Jerusalem and
dedicate it to Olympian Zeus, and that on Mount Gerizim to Zeus the Hospitable,
as the inhabitants of the place requested. 
3
This intensified the evil in an intolerable and
utterly disgusting way. 
4
[2]
 The Gentiles filled the temple with debauchery
and revelry; they amused themselves with prostitutes and had intercourse with
women even in the sacred court. They also brought into the temple things that
were forbidden, 
5
so that the altar was covered with abominable
offerings prohibited by the laws. 
6
A man could not keep the sabbath or celebrate
the traditional feasts, nor even admit that he was a Jew. 
7
[3]
 Moreover, at the monthly celebration of the
king's birthday the Jews had, from bitter necessity, to partake of the
sacrifices, and when the festival of Dionysus was celebrated, they were
compelled to march in his procession, wearing wreaths of ivy. 
8
At the suggestion of the citizens of Ptolemais,
a decree was issued ordering the neighboring Greek cities to act in the same
way against the Jews: oblige them to partake of the sacrifices, 
9
and put to death those who would not consent to
adopt the customs of the Greeks. It was obvious, therefore, that disaster
impended. 
10
Thus, two women who were arrested for having
circumcised their children were publicly paraded about the city with their
babies hanging at their breasts and then thrown down from the top of the city
wall. 
11
Others, who had assembled in nearby caves to
observe the sabbath in secret, were betrayed to Philip and all burned to death.
In their respect for the holiness of that day, they had scruples about
defending themselves. 
12
Now I beg those who read this book not to be
disheartened by these misfortunes, but to consider that these chastisements
were meant not for the ruin but for the correction of our nation. 
13
It is, in fact, a sign of great kindness to
punish sinners promptly instead of letting them go for long. 
14
Thus, in dealing with other nations, the Lord
patiently waits until they reach the full measure of their sins before he
punishes them; but with us he has decided to deal differently, 
15
in order that he may not have to punish us more
severely later, when our sins have reached their fullness. 
16
He never withdraws his mercy from us. Although
he disciplines us with misfortunes, he does not abandon his own people. 
17
Let these words suffice for recalling this
truth. Without further ado we must go on with our story. 
18
[4]
 Eleazar, one of the foremost scribes, a man of
advanced age and noble appearance, was being forced to open his mouth to eat
pork. 
19
But preferring a glorious death to a life of
defilement, he spat out the meat, and went forward of his own accord to the
instrument of torture, 
20
as men ought to do who have the courage to
reject the food which it is unlawful to taste even for love of life. 
21
Those in charge of that unlawful ritual meal
took the man aside privately, because of their long acquaintance with him, and
urged him to bring meat of his own providing, such as he could legitimately
eat, and to pretend to be eating some of the meat of the sacrifice prescribed
by the king; 
22
in this way he would escape the death penalty,
and be treated kindly because of their old friendship with him. 
23
But he made up his mind in a noble manner,
worthy of his years, the dignity of his advanced age, the merited distinction
of his gray hair, and of the admirable life he had lived from childhood; and so
he declared that above all he would be loyal to the holy laws given by God. He
told them to send him at once to the abode of the dead, explaining: 
24
"At our age it would be unbecoming to make
such a pretense; many young men would think the ninety-year-old Eleazar had
gone over to an alien religion. 
25
Should I thus dissimulate for the sake of a
brief moment of life, they would be led astray by me, while I would bring shame
and dishonor on my old age. 
26
Even if, for the time being, I avoid the
punishment of men, I shall never, whether alive or dead, escape the hands of
the Almighty. 
27
Therefore, by manfully giving up my life now, I
will prove myself worthy of my old age, 
28
and I will leave to the young a noble example
of how to die willingly and generously for the revered and holy laws." He
spoke thus, and went immediately to the instrument of torture. 
29
Those who shortly before had been kindly
disposed, now became hostile toward him because what he had said seemed to them
utter madness. 
30
When he was about to die under the blows, he
groaned and said: "The Lord in his holy knowledge knows full well that,
although I could have escaped death, I am not only enduring terrible pain in my
body from this scourging, but also suffering it with joy in my soul because of
my devotion to him." 
31
This is how he died, leaving in his death a
model of courage and an unforgettable example of virtue not only for the young
but for the whole nation. 
1
 [2] Olympian Zeus: equated with the
Syrian Baal Shamen ("the lord of the heavens"), a term which the Jews
rendered as "Shiqqus shomem," horrible abomination
(
⇒
 Daniel 9:27; 
⇒
 11:31;
⇒
 12:11; 
⇒
 1 Macc
1:54). 
2
 [4] Amused themselves with
prostitutes: as in the fertility cults of the ancient Near East; see notes on
⇒
 Baruch 6:10, 
⇒
 42-43.
3
 [7] Dionysus: called also Bacchus,
the god of the grape harvest and of wine; ivy was one of his symbols.
4
[
⇒
 6:18-
⇒
 7:42] The
stories of Eleazar and of the mother and her seven sons, among the earliest
models of "martyrology," were understandably popular among the
Christians of the early centuries. Written originally to encourage God's people
in times of persecution, they add gruesome details to the record of tortures,
and place long speeches in the mouths of the martyrs.