1
for your imperishable spirit is in all things! 
2
Therefore you rebuke offenders little by
little, warn them, and remind them of the sins they are committing, that they
may abandon their wickedness and believe in you, O LORD! 
3
For truly, the ancient inhabitants of your holy
land, 
4
whom you hated for deeds most odious -  Works of witchcraft and impious sacrifices; 
5
[1]
 a cannibal feast of human flesh and of blood,
from the midst of. . . -  These
merciless murderers of children, 
6
and parents who took with their own hands
defenseless lives, You willed to destroy by the hands of our fathers, 
7
that the land that is dearest of all to you
might receive a worthy colony of God's children. 
8
But even these, as they were men, you spared, and
sent wasps as forerunners of your army that they might exterminate them by
degrees. 
9
Not that you were without power to have the
wicked vanquished in battle by the just, or wiped out at once by terrible
beasts or by one decisive word; 
10
But condemning them bit by bit, you gave them
space for repentance. You were not unaware that their race was wicked and their
malice ingrained, And that their dispositions would never change; 
11
for they were a race accursed from the
beginning. Neither out of fear for anyone did you grant amnesty for their sins.
12
For who can say to you, "What have you
done?" or who can oppose your decree? Or when peoples perish, who can
challenge you, their maker; or who can come into your presence as vindicator of
unjust men? 
13
For neither is there any god besides you who
have the care of all, that you need show you have not unjustly condemned; 
14
Nor can any king or prince confront you on
behalf of those you have punished. 
15
But as you are just, you govern all things
justly; you regard it as unworthy of your power to punish one who has incurred
no blame. 
16
For your might is the source of justice; your
mastery over all things makes you lenient to all. 
17
[2]
 For you show your might when the perfection of
your power is disbelieved; and in those who know you, you rebuke temerity. 
18
But though you are master of might, you judge
with clemency, and with much lenience you govern us; for power, whenever you
will, attends you. 
19
And you taught your people, by these deeds,
that those who are just must be kind; And you gave your sons good ground for
hope that you would permit repentance for their sins. 
20
For these were enemies of your servants, doomed
to death; yet, while you punished them with such solicitude and pleading,
granting time and opportunity to abandon wickedness, 
21
With what exactitude you judged your sons, to
whose fathers you gave the sworn covenants of goodly promises! 
22
Us, therefore, you chastise and our enemies with
a thousand blows you punish, that we may think earnestly of your goodness when
we judge, and, when being judged, may look for mercy. 
23
Hence those unjust also, who lived a life of
folly, you tormented through their own abominations. 
24
For they went far astray in the paths of error,
taking for gods the worthless and disgusting among beasts, deceived like
senseless infants. 
25
Therefore as though upon unreasoning children,
you sent your judgment on them as a mockery; 
26
But they who took no heed of punishment which
was but child's play were to experience a condemnation worthy of God. 
27
For in the things through which they suffered
distress, since they were tortured by the very things they deemed gods, They
saw and recognized the true God whom before they had refused to know; with
this, their final condemnation came upon them. 
1
 [5] And of blood, from the midst of
. . .: this line is obscure in the current Greek text and in all extant
translations. Either one or two words would complete it. The horrible crimes
here spoken of (cf 
⇒
 Wisdom 14:23) were not
unheard of in the ancient pagan world. 
2
 [17] The brunt of God's anger and
vindictive justice is borne by those who know him and yet defy his authority
and might. Cf 
⇒
 Wisdom 1:2; 
⇒
 15:2
but also 
⇒
 12:27;
⇒
 18:13.