1
For great are your judgments, and hardly to be
described; therefore the unruly souls were wrong. 
2
For when the lawless thought to enslave the
holy nation, shackled with darkness, fettered by the long night, they lay confined
beneath their own roofs as exiles from the eternal providence. 
3
For they who supposed their secret sins were
hid under the dark veil of oblivion Were scattered in fearful trembling,
terrified by apparitions. 
4
For not even their inner chambers kept them
fearless, for crashing sounds on all sides terrified them, and mute phantoms
with somber looks appeared. 
5
No force, even of fire, was able to give light,
nor did the flaming brilliance of the stars succeed in lighting up that gloomy
night. 
6
[1]
 But only intermittent, fearful fires flashed
through upon them; And in their terror they thought beholding these was worse
than the times when that sight was no longer to be seen. 
7
And mockeries of the magic art were in
readiness, and a jeering reproof of their vaunted shrewdness. 
8
For they who undertook to banish fears and
terrors from the sick soul themselves sickened with a ridiculous fear. 
9
For even though no monstrous thing frightened
them, they shook at the passing of insects and the hissing of reptiles, 
10
And perished trembling, reluctant to face even
the air that they could nowhere escape. 
11
For wickedness, of its nature cowardly,
testifies in its own condemnation, and because of a distressed conscience,
always magnifies misfortunes. 
12
For fear is nought but the surrender of the
helps that come from reason; 
13
and the more one's expectation is of itself
uncertain, the more one makes of not knowing the cause that brings on torment. 
14
[2]
 So they, during that night, powerless though
it was, that had come upon them from the recesses of a powerless nether world,
while all sleeping the same sleep, 
15
Were partly smitten by fearsome apparitions and
partly stricken by their souls' surrender; for fear came upon them, sudden and
unexpected. 
16
Thus, then, whoever was there fell into that
unbarred prison and was kept confined. 
17
For whether one was a farmer, or a shepherd, or
a worker at tasks in the wasteland, Taken unawares, he served out the
inescapable sentence; 
18
for all were bound by the one bond of darkness.
And were it only the whistling wind, or the melodious song of birds in the
spreading branches, Or the steady sound of rushing water, 
19
or the rude crash of overthrown rocks, Or the
unseen gallop of bounding animals, or the roaring cry of the fiercest beasts,
Or an echo resounding from the hollow of the hills, these sounds, inspiring
terror, paralyzed them. 
20
For the whole world shone with brilliant light
and continued its works without interruption; 
21
Over them alone was spread oppressive night, an
image of the darkness that next should come upon them; yet they were to
themselves more burdensome than the darkness. 
1
 [6] Fires: that is, lightnings. 
2
 [14] Powerless: the nether world,
the home of darkness, has no power against God, nor even against such men as do
not submit to it of themselves; cf 
⇒
 Wisdom
1:14-16.