1
God of my fathers, LORD of mercy. you who have
made all things by your word 
2
And in your wisdom have established man to rule
the creatures produced by you, 
3
To govern the world in holiness and justice,
and to render judgment in integrity of heart: 
4
Give me Wisdom, the attendant at your throne,
and reject me not from among your children; 
5
For I am your servant, the son of your
handmaid, a man weak and short-lived and lacking in comprehension of judgment
and of laws. 
6
Indeed, though one be perfect among the sons of
men, if Wisdom, who comes from you, be not with him, he shall be held in no
esteem. 
7
You have chosen me king over your people and
magistrate for your sons and daughters. 
8
You have bid me build a temple on your holy mountain
and an altar in the city that is your dwelling place, a copy of the holy
tabernacle which you had established from of old. 
9
Now with you is Wisdom, who knows your works
and was present when you made the world; Who understands what is pleasing in
your eyes and what is conformable with your commands. 
10
Send her forth from your holy heavens and from
your glorious throne dispatch her That she may be with me and work with me,
that I may know what is your pleasure. 
11
For she knows and understands all things, and
will guide me discreetly in my affairs and safeguard me by her glory; 
12
Thus my deeds will be acceptable, and I shall
judge your people justly and be worthy of my father's throne. 
13
For what man knows God's counsel, or who can
conceive what our LORD intends? 
14
For the deliberations of mortals are timid, and
unsure are our plans. 
15
For the corruptible body burdens the soul and
the earthen shelter weighs down the mind that has many concerns. 
16
And scarce do we guess the things on earth, and
what is within our grasp we find with difficulty; but when things are in
heaven, who can search them out? 
17
Or who ever knew your counsel, except you had
given Wisdom and sent your holy spirit from on high? 
18
And thus were the paths of those on earth made
straight, and men learned what was your pleasure, and were saved by Wisdom. 