1
Then shall the just one with great assurance
confront his oppressors who set at nought his labors. 
2
Seeing this, they shall be shaken with dreadful
fear, and amazed at the unlooked-for salvation. 
3
They shall say among themselves, rueful and
groaning through anguish of spirit: "This is he whom once we held as a
laughingstock and as a type for mockery, 
4
fools that we were! His life we accounted
madness, and his death dishonored. 
5
See how he is accounted among the sons of God;
how his lot is with the saints! 
6
We, then, have strayed from the way of truth,
and the light of justice did not shine for us, and the sun did not rise for us.
7
We had our fill of the ways of mischief and of
ruin; we journeyed through impassable deserts, but the way of the LORD we knew
not. 
8
What did our pride avail us? What have wealth
and its boastfulness afforded us? 
9
All of them passed like a shadow and like a
fleeting rumor; 
10
Like a ship traversing the heaving water, of
which, when it has passed, no trace can be found, no path of its keel in the
waves. 
11
Or like a bird flying through the air; no
evidence of its course is to be found - But the fluid air, lashed by the beat
of pinions, and cleft by the rushing force Of speeding wings, is traversed: and
afterward no mark of passage can be found in it. 
12
Or as, when an arrow has been shot at a mark,
the parted air straightway flows together again so that none discerns the way
it went through - 
13
Even so we, once born, abruptly came to nought
and held no sign of virtue to display, but were consumed in our wickedness."
14
Yes, the hope of the wicked is like thistledown
borne on the wind, and like fine, tempest-driven foam; Like smoke scattered by
the wind, and like the passing memory of the nomad camping for a single day. 
15
But the just live forever, and in the LORD is
their recompense, and the thought of them is with the Most High. 
16
Therefore shall they receive the splendid
crown, the beauteous diadem, from the hand of the LORD - For he shall shelter
them with his right hand, and protect them with his arm. 
17
He shall take his zeal for armor and he shall
arm creation to requite the enemy; 
18
He shall don justice for a breastplate and shall
wear sure judgment for a helmet; 
19
He shall take invincible rectitude as a shield 
20
and whet his sudden anger for a sword, And the
universe shall war with him against the foolhardy. 
21
Well-aimed shafts of lightnings shall go forth
and from the clouds as from a well-drawn bow shall leap to the mark; 
22
and as from his sling, wrathful hailstones
shall be hurled. The water of the sea shall be enraged against them and the
streams shall abruptly overflow; 
23
A mighty wind shall confront them and a tempest
winnow them out; Thus lawlessness shall lay the whole earth waste and evildoing
overturn the thrones of potentates. 