Introduction
Introduction
This Book takes
its name, not from the author, who is actually unknown, but from its hero, a
young Jew taken early to Babylon, where he lived at least until 538 B.C.
Strictly speaking, the book does not belong to the prophetic writings but
rather to a distinctive type of literature known as "apocalyptic," of
which it is an early specimen. Apocalyptic writing enjoyed its greatest
popularity from 200 B.C. to 100 A.D., a time of distress and persecution for
Jews, and later, for Christians. Though subsequent in time to the prophetic,
apocalyptic literature has its roots in the teaching of the prophets, who often
pointed ahead to the day of the Lord, the consummation of history. For both
prophet and apocalyptist Yahweh was the Lord of history, and he would ultimately
vindicate his people.
This work was composed
during the bitter persecution carried on by Antiochus IV Epiphanes (167-164)
and was written to strengthen and comfort the Jewish people in their ordeal.
The Book contains stories
originating in and transmitted by popular traditions which tell of the trials
and triumphs of the wise Daniel and his three companions. The moral is that men
of faith can resist temptation and conquer adversity. The characters are not
purely legendary but rest on older historical tradition. What is more important
than the question of historicity, and closer to the intention of the author, is
the fact that a persecuted Jew of the second century B.C. would quickly see the
application of these stories to his own plight.
There follows a series of
visions promising deliverance and glory to the Jews in the days to come. The
great nations of the ancient world have risen in vain against Yahweh; his
kingdom shall overthrow existing powers and last forever. Under this
apocalyptic imagery are contained some of the best elements of prophetic
teaching: the insistence on right conduct, the divine control over events, the
certainty that the kingdom of God will ultimately triumph. The arrival of the
kingdom is a central theme of the synoptic gospels, and Jesus, in calling
himself the "Son of Man," reminds us that he fulfills the destiny of
this mysterious figure in the seventh chapter of Daniel.
The added episodes of
Susanna, Bel, and the Dragon, found only in the Greek version, are edifying
short stories with a didactic purpose.
These three sections
constitute the divisions of the Book of Daniel:
I.          
and the Kings of Babylon (
⇒
1:1-
⇒
 6:29) 
II.          
Daniel's
Visions (
⇒
 Daniel 7:1-
⇒
 12:13)
III.          
Appendix
((Dan)Sus 13; Bel 14)