1
[1]
 In the first year of King Belshazzar of
Babylon, Daniel had a dream as he lay in bed, and was terrified by the visions
of his mind. Then he wrote down the dream; the account began: 
2
[2]
 In the vision I saw during the night, suddenly
the four winds of heaven stirred up the great sea, 
3
from which emerged four immense beasts, each
different from the others. 
4
[3]
 The first was like a lion, but with eagle's
wings. While I watched, the wings were plucked; it was raised from the ground
to stand on two feet like a man, and given a human mind. 
5
[4]
 The second was like a bear; it was raised up
on one side, and among the teeth in its mouth were three tusks. It was given
the order, "Up, devour much flesh." 
6
[5]
 After this I looked and saw another beast,
like a leopard; on its back were four wings like those of a bird, and it had
four heads. To this beast dominion was given. 
7
[6]
 After this, in the visions of the night I saw
the fourth beast, different from all the others, terrifying, horrible, and of
extraordinary strength; it had great iron teeth with which it devoured and
crushed, and what was left it trampled with its feet. 
8
I was considering the ten horns it had, when
suddenly another, a little horn, sprang out of their midst, and three of the
previous horns were torn away to make room for it. This horn had eyes like a
man, and a mouth that spoke arrogantly. 
9
[7]
 As I watched, Thrones were set up and the
Ancient One took his throne. His clothing was snow bright, and the hair on his
head as white as wool; His throne was flames of fire, with wheels of burning
fire. 
10
A surging stream of fire flowed out from where
he sat; Thousands upon thousands were ministering to him, and myriads upon
myriads attended him. The court was convened, and the books were opened. 
11
I watched, then, from the first of the arrogant
words which the horn spoke, until the beast was slain and its body thrown into
the fire to be burnt up. 
12
The other beasts, which also lost their dominion,
were granted a prolongation of life for a time and a season. 
13
[8]
 As the visions during the night continued, I
saw One like a son of man coming, on the clouds of heaven; When he reached the
Ancient One and was presented before him, 
14
He received dominion, glory, and kingship;
nations and peoples of every language serve him. His dominion is an everlasting
dominion that shall not be taken away, his kingship shall not be destroyed. 
15
I, Daniel, found my spirit anguished within its
sheath of flesh, and I was terrified by the visions of my mind. 
16
I approached one of those present and asked him
what all this meant in truth; in answer, he made known to me the meaning of the
things: 
17
"These four great beasts stand for four
kingdoms which shall arise on the earth. 
18
But the holy ones of the Most High shall
receive the kingship, to possess it forever and ever." 
19
But I wished to make certain about the fourth
beast, so very terrible and different from the others, devouring and crushing
with its iron teeth and bronze claws, and trampling with its feet what was
left; 
20
about the ten horns on its head, and the other
one that sprang up, before which three horns fell; about the horn with the eyes
and the mouth that spoke arrogantly, which appeared greater than its fellows. 
21
For, as I watched, that horn made war against
the holy ones and was victorious 
22
until the Ancient One arrived; judgment was
pronounced in favor of the holy ones of the Most High, and the time came when
the holy ones possessed the kingdom. 
23
He answered me thus: "The fourth beast
shall be a fourth kingdom on earth, different from all the others; It shall
devour the whole earth, beat it down, and crush it. 
24
The ten horns shall be ten kings rising out of
that kingdom; another shall rise up after them, Different from those before
him, who shall lay low three kings. 
25
[9]
 He shall speak against the Most High and
oppress the holy ones of the Most High, thinking to change the feast days and
the law. They shall be handed over to him for a year, two years, and a
half-year. 
26
But when the court is convened, and his power
is taken away by final and absolute destruction, 
27
Then the kingship and dominion and majesty of
all the kingdoms under the heavens shall be given to the holy people of the
Most High, Whose kingdom shall be everlasting: all dominions shall serve and
obey him." 
28
[10]
 The report concluded: I, Daniel, was greatly
terrified by my thoughts, and my face blanched, but I kept the matter to
myself. 
1
 [1-27] The significance of this
vision is the same as that of Nebuchadnezzar's dream in Daniel 2; see note on
⇒
 Daniel 2:36-45. To the four succeeding world
kingdoms, Babylonian, Median, Persian, and Greek, is opposed the messianic
kingdom of the people of God. The imagery of this chapter has been used
extensively in the Revelation of St. John, where it is applied to the Roman
empire, the persecutor of the Church. 
2
 [2] The great sea: the primordial
ocean beneath the earth, according to primitive cosmology
(
⇒
 Genesis 7:11;
⇒
 49:25). This was thought to contain various
monsters (
⇒
 Isaiah 27:1; 
⇒
 Job
7:12), and in particular mythological monsters symbolizing the chaos
which God had vanquished in ancient times (
⇒
 Job
9:13; 
⇒
 26:13; etc.).
3
 [4] The representation of the Babylonian
empire as a winged lion, a common motif in Babylonian art, symbolizes the
bestial power hostile to God. The two wings that were plucked represent
Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar. On two feet like a man . . . a human mind:
contrasts with what is said in 
⇒
 Daniel 4:13,
⇒
 30.
4
 [5] A bear: represents the Median
empire, its three tusks symbolizing its destructive nature; hence, the command:
"Up, devour much flesh."
5
 [6] A leopard: used to symbolize
the swiftness with which Cyrus the Persian established his kingdom. Four heads:
corresponding to the four Persian kings of 
⇒
11:2.
6
 [7-8] Alexander's empire was
different from all the others in that it was Western rather than Oriental in
inspiration. The ten horns represent the kings of the Seleucid dynasty, the
only part of the Hellenistic empire that concerned the author. The little horn
is Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175-163 B.C.), the worst of the Seleucid kings, who
usurped the throne.
7
 [9-10] A vision of the heavenly
throne of God (the Ancient One), who sits in judgment (symbolized by fire) over
the nations. Some of the details of the vision, depicting the divine majesty
and omnipotence, are to be found in Ezekial 1.
8
 [13-14] One like a son of man: in
contrast to the worldly kingdoms opposed to God, which appear as beasts, the
glorified people of God that will form his kingdom on earth is represented in
human form (
⇒
 Daniel 7:18). Just as our Lord applied
the figure of the stone hewn from the mountain to himself
(
⇒
 Daniel 2:36-45), he also made the title "Son
of Man" his most characteristic way of referring to himself, as the One in
whom and through whom the salvation of God's people came to be realized.
9
 [25] The reference is to the
persecutions of Antiochus IV and his attempt to force the Jews to give up their
customs and to adopt Hellenistic ways (
⇒
 1 Macc
1:33-34). A year, two years, and a half-year: an indefinite, evil
period of time. As seven is the Jewish "perfect" number, half of it
signifies great imperfection. Actually, this corresponds fairly accurately to
the duration of Antiochus' persecution.
10
 [28] This verse ends the Aramaic
part of the Book of Daniel.