1
[1]
 It was the first year that Darius, son of
Ahasuerus, of the race of the Medes, reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldeans;
2
[2]
 in the first year of his reign I, Daniel,
tried to understand in the Scriptures the counting of the years of which the
LORD spoke to the prophet Jeremiah: that for the ruins of Jerusalem seventy
years must be fulfilled. 
3
I turned to the Lord God, pleading in earnest
prayer, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes. 
4
I prayed to the LORD, my God, and confessed,
"Ah, Lord, great and awesome God, you who keep your merciful covenant
toward those who love you and observe your commandments! 
5
We have sinned, been wicked and done evil; we
have rebelled and departed from your commandments and your laws. 
6
We have not obeyed your servants the prophets,
who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, our fathers, and all the
people of the land. 
7
Justice, O Lord, is on your side; we are
shamefaced even to this day: the men of Judah, the residents of Jerusalem, and
all Israel, near and far, in all the countries to which you have scattered them
because of their treachery toward you. 
8
O LORD, we are shamefaced, like our kings, our
princes, and our fathers, for having sinned against you. 
9
But yours, O Lord, our God, are compassion and
forgiveness! Yet we rebelled against you 
10
and paid no heed to your command, O LORD, our
God, to live by the law you gave us through your servants the prophets. 
11
Because all Israel transgressed your law and
went astray, not heeding your voice, the sworn malediction, recorded in the law
of Moses, the servant of God, was poured out over us for our sins. 
12
You carried out the threats you spoke against
us and against those who governed us, by bringing upon us in Jerusalem the
greatest calamity that has ever occurred under heaven. 
13
[3]
 As it is written in the law of Moses, this
calamity came full upon us. As we did not appease the LORD, our God, by turning
back from our wickedness and recognizing his constancy, 
14
so the LORD kept watch over the calamity and
brought it upon us. You, O LORD, our God, are just in all that you have done,
for we did not listen to your voice. 
15
"Now, O Lord, our God, who led your people
out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand, and made a name for yourself even
to this day, we have sinned, we are guilty. 
16
O Lord, in keeping with all your just deeds,
let your anger and your wrath be turned away from your city Jerusalem, your
holy mountain. On account of our sins and the crimes of our fathers, Jerusalem
and your people have become the reproach of all our neighbors. 
17
Hear, therefore, O God, the prayer and petition
of your servant; and for your own sake, O Lord, let your face shine upon your
desolate sanctuary. 
18
Give ear, O my God, and listen; open your eyes
and see our ruins and the city which bears your name. When we present our
petition before you, we rely not on our just deeds, but on your great mercy. 
19
O Lord, hear! O Lord, pardon! O Lord, be attentive and act without
delay, for your own sake, O my God, because this city and your people bear your
name!" 
20
I was still occupied with my prayer, confessing
my sin and the sin of my people Israel, presenting my petition to the LORD, my
God, on behalf of his holy mountain -  
21
[4]
 I was still occupied with this prayer, when
Gabriel, the one whom I had seen before in vision, came to me in rapid flight
at the time of the evening sacrifice. 
22
He instructed me in these words: "Daniel,
I have now come to give you understanding. 
23
When you began your petition, an answer was
given which I have come to announce, because you are beloved. Therefore, mark
the answer and understand the vision. 
24
[5]
 "Seventy weeks are decreed for your
people and for your holy city: Then transgression will stop and sin will end,
guilt will be expiated, Everlasting justice will be introduced, vision and
prophecy ratified, and a most holy will be anointed. 
25
[6]
 Know and understand this: From the utterance
of the word that Jerusalem was to be rebuilt Until one who is anointed and a
leader, there shall be seven weeks. During sixty-two weeks it shall be rebuilt,
With streets and trenches, in time of affliction. 
26
[7]
 After the sixty-two weeks an anointed shall be
cut down when he does not possess the city; And the people of a leader who will
come shall destroy the sanctuary. Then the end shall come like a torrent; until
the end there shall be war, the desolation that is decreed. 
27
[8]
 For one week he shall make a firm compact with
the many; Half the week he shall abolish sacrifice and oblation; On the temple
wing shall be the horrible abomination until the ruin that is decreed is poured
out upon the horror." 
1
 [1] Darius: see the note on
⇒
 Daniel 6:1. 
2
 [2] Seventy years: the prophet
Jeremiah (
⇒
 Jeremiah 25:11;
⇒
 29:10) prophesied a Babylonian captivity of
seventy years, a round number signifying the complete passing away of the
existing generation. Jeremiah's prophecy was fulfilled in the capture of
Babylon by Cyrus and the subsequent return of the Jews to Palestine. However,
the author of Daniel, living during the persecution of Antiochus, sees the
conditions of the exile still existing; therefore, in his meditation he extends
Jeremiah's number to seventy weeks of years (
⇒
9:24), i.e., seven times seventy years, to characterize the Jewish
victory over the Seleucids as the ultimate fulfillment of the prophecy.
3
 [13] As it is written: the first
time that this formula of Scriptural citation is used in the Bible. The
reference (
⇒
 Daniel 9:11) is to the sanctions of
⇒
 Lev 26:14-16; 
⇒
 Deut 28:15-17.
4
 [21] At the time of the evening
sacrifice: between three and four in the afternoon.
5
 [24] Seventy weeks: i.e., of years.
Just as Jeremiah's seventy years was an approximation (see note on
⇒
 Daniel 9:2), the four hundred and ninety years here
is not to be taken literally. Similarly, the distribution of the
"weeks" in the following verses indicates only relative proportions
of the total figure. A most holy: an expression used almost always of an object,
the altar or the temple, but once (
⇒
 1 Chron
23:13) of Aaron the high priest. The author sees the definitive
establishment of the kingdom of God, realized in the reconsecration of the
temple after Antiochus' desecration, or personified in the holy community (like
the Son of Man of Daniel 7). The Fathers of the Church almost unanimously
understood the reference to be to Christ, the final realization of the
prophecy.
6
 [25] From the utterance . . . to be
rebuilt: from the time of Jeremiah's prophecy. One . . . anointed and a leader:
either Cyrus, who was called the anointed of the Lord to end the exile
(
⇒
 Isaiah 45:1), or the high priest Joshua who
presided over the rebuilding of the altar of sacrifice after the exile
(
⇒
 Ezra 3:2). Seven weeks: forty-nine years, an
approximation of the time of the exile. During sixty-two weeks . . . rebuilt: a
period of 434 years, roughly approximating the interval between the rebuilding
of Jerusalem after the exile and the beginning of the Seleucid persecution.
7
 [26] An anointed: doubtless the
high priest Onias III, murdered in 171 B.C., from which the author dates the
beginning of the persecution. Onias was in exile when he was killed. A leader:
Antiochus IV.
8
 [27] One week: the final phase of
the period in view, the time of Antiochus' persecution; he is Antiochus
himself. The many: the faithless Jews who allied themselves with the heathen;
cf 
⇒
 1 Macc 1:11-13. Half the week: three and a
half years; see note on 
⇒
 1 Macc 7:25. The temple
was desecrated by Antiochus from 167 to 165 B.C. The temple wing: probably the
main portal. The horrible abomination: see note on 
⇒
8:13. Perhaps an inscription was placed on the portal of the temple
dedicating it to the Olympian Zeus. Our Lord referred to this passage in his
own prediction of the destruction of Jerusalem (
⇒
 Matthew
24:15).