1
[1]
[2]
 Woe to the complacent in Zion,
to the overconfident on the mount of Samaria, Leaders of a nation favored from
the first, to whom the people of Israel have recourse! 
2
Pass over to Calneh and see, go from there to
Hamath the great, and down to Gath of the Philistines! Are you better than
these kingdoms, or is your territory wider than theirs? 
3
You would put off the evil day, yet you hasten
the reign of violence! 
4
Lying upon beds of ivory, stretched comfortably
on their couches, They eat lambs taken from the flock, and calves from the
stall! 
5
Improvising to the music of the harp, like
David, they devise their own accompaniment. 
6
They drink wine from bowls and anoint
themselves with the best oils; yet they are not made ill by the collapse of
Joseph! 
7
Therefore, now they shall be the first to go
into exile, and their wanton revelry shall be done away with. 
8
The Lord GOD has sworn by his very self, say I,
the LORD, the God of hosts: I abhor the pride of Jacob, I hate his castles, and
I give over the city with everything in it; 
9
Should there remain ten men in a single house,
these shall die. 
10
Only a few shall be left to carry the dead out
of the houses; If one says to a man inside a house, "Is anyone with
you?" and he answers, "No one," Then he shall say,
"Silence!" for no one must mention the name of the LORD. 
11
Indeed, the LORD has given the command to
shatter the great house to bits, and reduce the small house to rubble. 
12
[3]
 Can horses run across a cliff? or can one plow
the sea with oxen? Yet you have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of
justice into wormwood. 
13
[4]
 You rejoice in Lodebar, and say, "Have we
not, by our own strength, seized for ourselves Karnaim?" 
14
[5]
 Beware, I am raising up against you, O house
of Israel, say I, the LORD, the God of hosts, A nation that shall oppress you
from Labo of Hamath even to the Wadi Arabah. 
1
 [1-7] The luxury of the people in
Samaria will be punished by exile. They failed to learn the lesson from Calneh,
Hamath and Gath at the approach of the powerful and warlike Assyrians.
2
 [1] The complacent in Zion . . .
the overconfident . . . of Samaria: the proud and self-interested rulers of
Judah and Israel. 
3
 [12] Can horses . . . oxen?: one
cannot change the course of nature, as the Israelites attempted to do by their
sins of injustice.
4
 [13] Lodebar . . . Karnaim: in Transjordan; they had
been captured by the Israelites. Perhaps it is in irony that reference is made
to these two cities, for the root of the first suggests "nothing" and
that of the second, "horns" or "strength."
5
 [14] A nation: Assyria.