Introduction
Introduction
Amos was a
shepherd of Tekoa in Judah, who exercised his ministry during the prosperous
reign of Jeroboam II (786-746 B.C.). He prophesied in Israel at the great cult
center of Bethel, from which he was finally expelled by the priest in charge of
this royal sanctuary. The poetry of Amos, who denounces the hollow prosperity
of the northern kingdom, is filled with imagery and language taken from his own
pastoral background. The book is an anthology of his oracles and was compiled
either by the prophet or by some of his disciples.
The prophecy begins with a
sweeping indictment of Damascus, Philistia, Tyre, and Edom; but the forthright
herdsman saves his climactic denunciation for Israel, whose injustice and
idolatry are sins against the light granted to her. Israel could indeed expect
the day of Yahweh, but it would be a day of darkness and not light. When Amos
prophesied the overthrow of the sanctuary, the fall of the royal house, and the
captivity of the people, it was more than Israelite officialdom could bear. The
priest of Bethel drove Amos from the shrine-but not before hearing a terrible
sentence pronounced upon himself.
Amos is a prophet of divine
judgment, and the sovereignty of Yahweh in nature and history dominates his
thought. But he was no innovator; his conservatism was in keeping with the
whole prophetic tradition calling the people back to the high moral and
religious demands of Yahweh's revelation. In common with the other prophets,
Amos knew that divine punishment is never completely destructive; it is part of
the hidden plan of God to bring salvation to men. The perversity of the human
will may retard, but it cannot totally frustrate, this design of a loving God.
The last oracle opens up a perspective of restoration under a Davidic king.
The Book of Amos may be
divided as follows:
I.          
Judgment
of the Nations (
⇒
1:1-
⇒
 2:16) 
II.          
Words
and Woes for Israel (
⇒
 Amos 3:1-
⇒
 6:14)
III.          
Symbolic
Visions: Threats and Promises (
⇒
7:1-
⇒
 9:8, 9) 
IV.          
Epilogue:
Messianic Perspective (
⇒
 Amos 9:8c-15)