1
[1]
 What then shall we say? Shall we persist in
sin that grace may abound? Of course not! 
2
How can we who died to sin yet live in it? 
3
Or are you unaware that we who were baptized
into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 
4
We were indeed buried with him through baptism
into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of
the Father, we too might live in newness of life. 
5
For if we have grown into union with him
through a death like his, we shall also be united with him in the resurrection.
6
We know that our old self was crucified with
him, so that our sinful body might be done away with, that we might no longer
be in slavery to sin. 
7
For a dead person has been absolved from sin. 
8
If, then, we have died with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him. 
9
We know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies
no more; death no longer has power over him. 
10
As to his death, he died to sin once and for
all; as to his life, he lives for God. 
11
Consequently, you too must think of yourselves
as (being) dead to sin and living for God in Christ Jesus. 
12
[2]
 Therefore, sin must not reign over your mortal
bodies so that you obey their desires. 
13
And do not present the parts of your bodies to
sin as weapons for wickedness, but present yourselves to God as raised from the
dead to life and the parts of your bodies to God as weapons for righteousness. 
14
For sin is not to have any power over you,
since you are not under the law but under grace. 
15
What then? Shall we sin because we are not
under the law but under grace? Of course not! 
16
Do you not know that if you present yourselves
to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of
sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads to righteousness? 
17
But thanks be to God that, although you were
once slaves of sin, you have become obedient from the heart to the pattern of
teaching to which you were entrusted. 
[3]
18
Freed from sin, you have become slaves of
righteousness. 
19
I am speaking in human terms because of the
weakness of your nature. For just as you presented the parts of your bodies as
slaves to impurity and to lawlessness for lawless ness, so now present them as
slaves to righteousness for sanctification. 
20
For when you were slaves of sin, you were free
from righteousness. 
[4]
21
But what profit did you get then from the
things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. 
22
But now that you have been freed from sin and
have become slaves of God, the benefit that you have leads to sanctification, 
[5]
and its end is eternal life. 
23
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
1
 [1-11] To defend the gospel against
the charge that it promotes moral laxity (cf 
⇒
3:5-8), Paul expresses himself in the typical style of spirited
diatribe. God's display of generosity or grace is not evoked by sin but, as stated
in 
⇒
 Romans 5:8 is the expression of God's love, and
this love pledges eternal life to all believers (
⇒
5:21). Paul views the present conduct of the believers from the
perspective of God's completed salvation when the body is resurrected and
directed totally by the holy Spirit. Through baptism believers share the death
of Christ and thereby escape from the grip of sin. Through the resurrection of
Christ the power to live anew becomes reality for them, but the fullness of
participation in Christ's resurrection still lies in the future. But life that
is lived in dedication to God now is part and parcel of that future. Hence
anyone who sincerely claims to be interested in that future will scarcely be
able to say, "Let us sin so that grace may prosper" (cf
⇒
 Romans 6:1). 
2
 [12-19] Christians have been
released from the grip of sin, but sin endeavors to reclaim its victims. The
antidote is constant remembrance that divine grace has claimed them and
identifies them as people who are alive only for God's interests.
3
 [17] In contrast to humanity, which
was handed over to self-indulgence (
⇒
1:24-32), believers are entrusted ("handed over") to God's
pattern of teaching, that is, the new life God aims to develop in Christians
through the productivity of the holy Spirit. Throughout this passage Paul uses
the slave-master model in order to emphasize the fact that one cannot give
allegiance to both God and sin.
4
 [20] You were free from
righteousness: expressed ironically, for such freedom is really tyranny. The
commercial metaphors in 
⇒
 Romans 6:21-23 add up only
one way: sin is a bad bargain.
5
 [22] Sanctification: or holiness.