1
[1]
 Are you unaware, brothers (for I am speaking
to people who know the law), that the law has jurisdiction over one as long as
one lives? 
2
Thus a married woman is bound by law to her
living husband; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law in
respect to her husband. 
3
Consequently, while her husband is alive she
will be called an adulteress if she consorts with another man. But if her
husband dies she is free from that law, and she is not an adulteress if she
consorts with another man. 
4
In the same way, my brothers, you also were put
to death to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might belong to
another, to the one who was raised from the dead in order that we might bear
fruit for God. 
5
For when we were in the flesh, our sinful
passions, awakened by the law, worked in our members to bear fruit for death. 
6
But now we are released from the law, dead to
what held us captive, so that we may serve in the newness of the spirit and not
under the obsolete letter. 
7
[2]
[3]
 What then can we say?
That the law is sin? Of course not! Yet I did not know sin except through the
law, and I did not know what it is to covet except that the law said, "You
shall not covet." 
8
But sin, finding an opportunity in the
commandment, produced in me every kind of covetousness. Apart from the law sin
is dead. 
9
I once lived outside the law, but when the
commandment came, sin became alive; 
10
then I died, and the commandment that was for
life turned out to be death for me. 
11
For sin, seizing an opportunity in the
commandment, deceived me and through it put me to death. 
12
So then the law is holy, and the commandment is
holy and righteous and good. 
13
[4]
 Did the good, then, become death for me? Of
course not! Sin, in order that it might be shown to be sin, worked death in me
through the good, so that sin might become sinful beyond measure through the
commandment. 
14
We know that the law is spiritual; but I am
carnal, sold into slavery to sin. 
15
What I do, I do not understand. For I do not do
what I want, but I do what I hate. 
16
Now if I do what I do not want, I concur that
the law is good. 
17
So now it is no longer I who do it, but sin
that dwells in me. 
18
For I know that good does not dwell in me, that
is, in my flesh. The willing is ready at hand, but doing the good is not. 
19
For I do not do the good I want, but I do the
evil I do not want. 
20
Now if (I) do what I do not want, it is no
longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me. 
21
So, then, I discover the principle that when I
want to do right, evil is at hand. 
22
For I take delight in the law of God, in my
inner self, 
23
but I see in my members another principle at
war with the law of my mind, taking me captive to the law of sin that dwells in
my members. 
[5]
24
Miserable one that I am! Who will deliver me
from this mortal body? 
25
Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Therefore, I myself, with my mind, serve the law of God but, with my flesh, the
law of sin. 
1
 [1-6] Paul reflects on the fact
that Christians have a different understanding of the law because of their
faith in Christ. Law binds the living, not the dead, as exemplified in
marriage, which binds in life but is dissolved through death. Similarly,
Christians who through baptism have died with Christ to sin (cf
⇒
 Romans 6:2-4) are freed from the law that
occasioned transgressions, which in turn were productive of death. Now that
Christians are joined to Christ, the power of Christ's resurrection makes it
possible for them to bear the fruit of newness of life for God. 
2
 [7-25] In this passage Paul uses
the first person singular in the style of diatribe for the sake of argument. He
aims to depict the disastrous consequences when a Christian reintroduces the
law as a means to attain the objective of holiness pronounced in
⇒
 Romans 6:22.
3
 [7-12] The apostle defends himself against
the charge of identifying the law with sin. Sin does not exist in law but in
human beings, whose sinful inclinations are not overcome by the proclamation of
law.
4
 [13-25] Far from improving the
sinner, law encourages sin to expose itself in transgressions or violations of
specific commandments (see 
⇒
 Romans 1:24;
⇒
 5:20). Thus persons who do not experience the
justifying grace of God, and Christians who revert to dependence on law as the
criterion for their relationship with God, will recognize a rift between their
reasoned desire for the goodness of the law and their actual performance that
is contrary to the law. Unable to free themselves from the slavery of sin and
the power of death, they can only be rescued from defeat in the conflict by the
power of God's grace working through Jesus Christ.
5
 [23] As in
⇒
 Romans 3:27 Paul plays on the term law, which in
Greek can connote custom, system, or principle.