Introduction
Introduction
The Song of
Songs, meaning the greatest of songs (
⇒
 Song 1:1),
contains in exquisite poetic form the sublime portrayal and praise of the
mutual love of the Lord and his people. The Lord is the Lover and his people
are the beloved. Describing this relationship in terms of human love, the
author simply follows Israel's tradition. Isaiah (
⇒
 Isaiah
5:1-7; 
⇒
 54:4-8), Jeremiah
(
⇒
 Jeremiah 2:2, 3,
⇒
 32), and Ezekiel (Eze 16; 23) all characterize the
covenant between the Lord and Israel as a marriage. Hosea the prophet sees the
idolatry of Israel in the adultery of Gomer (Son 1-3). He also represents the
Lord speaking to Israel's heart (
⇒
 Song 2:16) and
changing her into a new spiritual people, purified by the Babylonian captivity
and betrothed anew to her divine Lover "in justice and uprightness, in
love and mercy" (Song 2:21).
The author of the Song,
using the same literary figure, paints a beautiful picture of the ideal Israel,
the chosen people of the Old and New Testaments, whom the Lord led by degrees
to an exalted spiritual union with himself in the bond of perfect love. When
the Song is thus interpreted here is no reason for surprise at the tone of the
poem, which employs in its descriptions the courtship and marriage customs of
the author's time. Moreover, the poem is not an allegory in which each remark,
e. g., in the dialogue of the lovers, has a higher meaning. It is a parable in
which the true meaning of mutual love comes from the poem as a whole.
While the Song is thus
commonly understood by most Catholic scholars, it is also possible to see in it
an inspired portrayal of ideal human love. Here we would have from God a
description of the sacredness and the depth of married union.
Although the poem is
attributed to Solomon in the traditional title (
⇒
 Song
1:1), the language and style of the work, among other considerations,
point to a time after the end of the Babylonian Exile (538 B.C.) as that in
which an unknown poet composed this masterpiece. The structure of the Song is
difficult to analyze; here it is regarded as a lyric dialogue, with dramatic
movement and interest.
The use of marriage as a
symbol, characteristic of the Song, is found extensively also in the New
Testament (
⇒
 Matthew 9:15;
⇒
 25:1-13; 
⇒
 John 3:29;
⇒
 2 Cor 11:2; 
⇒
 Eph
5:23-32; 
⇒
 Rev 19:7-9;
⇒
 21:9-11). In Christian tradition, the Song has
been interpreted in terms of the union between Christ and the Church and,
particularly by St. Bernard, of the union between Christ and the individual
soul. Throughout the liturgy, especially in the Little Office, there is a
consistent application of the Song of Songs to the Blessed Virgin
Mary.