Introduction
Introduction
The Second Book
of Chronicles takes up the history of the monarchy where the First Book breaks
off. It begins with the account of the reign of Solomon from the special
viewpoint of the Chronicler. The portrait of Solomon is an idealized one; he
appears as second only to David. The great achievement of the building of the
temple and the magnificence of Solomon's court are described in detail while
the serious defects of his reign are passed over without comment. All this is
in keeping with the Chronicler's purpose of stressing the supreme importance of
the temple and its worship. He wishes to impress on his readers the splendor of
God's dwelling and the magnificence of the liturgy of sacrifice, prayer and
praise offered there. Judah's kings are judged by their attitude toward the
temple and its cult. To this ideal of one people, united in the worship of the
one true God at the temple of Jerusalem founded by David and Solomon, the
restored community would have to conform.
In treating the period of
divided monarchy, the Chronicler gives practically all his attention to the
kingdom of Judah. His omission of the northern Israelite kings is significant.
In his view, the northern tribes of Israel were in religious schism as long as
they worshiped Yahweh in a place other than the temple of Jerusalem. The
Chronicler makes no mention of the important sanctuaries of Yahweh at Dan and
Bethel-as though they had never existed. Nevertheless he retains the ancient
ideal of "all Israel" (a phrase occuring forty-one times in
Chronicles) as the people of God. The condition he places for a united people
is that "the whole congregation of Israel" worship the Lord only in
his temple at Jerusalem. This explains his praise of Kings Hezekiah and Josiah
for striving, after the fall of Samaria, to unite the remnants of the northern
tribes of Israel into the kingdom of Judah.
At the end of the fifth
century B.C., during the Chronicler's own time, "the people of the
land" were the descendants of the people of all the tribes (including
Judah) who had not gone into exile. These had become intermingled with aliens
and had evolved a religion of Yahweh very different from the Judaism that
developed during the Babylonian exile. Thus, religious and political
cooperation between the returned exiles and these "people of the
land" was out of the question for the Chronicler. This he clearly shows in
the last part of his work, the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
The Second Book of
Chronicles is divided as follows:
I.          
The
Reign of Solomon (
⇒
 2 Chron
1:1-
⇒
 9:31) 
II.          
The
Monarchy before Hezekiah (
⇒
 2 Chron 10:1-
⇒
 27:9)
III.          
Reforms
of Hezekiah and Josiah (
⇒
 2 Chron
28:1-
⇒
 36:1) 
IV.          
End of
the Kingdom (
⇒
 2 Chron 36:2-23)