Introduction
Introduction
The Book of
Tobit, named after its principal hero, combines specifically Jewish piety and
morality with oriental folklore in a fascinating story that has enjoyed wide
popularity in both Jewish and Christian circles. Prayers, psalms, and words of
wisdom, as well as the skillfully constructed story itself, provide valuable
insights into the faith and the religious milieu of its unknown author. The
book was probably written early in the second century B.C.; it is not known
where.
Tobit, a devout and wealthy
Israelite living among the captives deported to Nineveh from the northern
kingdom of Israel in 721 B.C., suffers severe reverses and is finally blinded.
Because of his misfortunes he begs the Lord to let him die. But recalling the
large sum he had formerly deposited in far-off Media, he sends his son Tobiah there
to bring back the money. In Media, at this same time, a young woman, Sarah,
also prays for death, because she has lost seven husbands, each killed in turn
on his wedding night by the demon Asmodeus. God hears the prayers of Tobit and
Sarah, and sends the angel Raphael in disguise to aid them both.
Raphael makes the trip to
Media with Tobiah. When Tobiah is attacked by a large fish as he bathes,
Raphael orders him to seize it and to remove its gall, heart, and liver because
they make "useful medicines." Later, at Raphael's urging, Tobiah
marries Sarah, and uses the the fish's heart and liver to drive Asmodeus from
the bridal chamber. Returning to Nineveh with his wife and his father's money,
Tobiah rubs the fish's gall into his father's eyes and cures them. Finally,
Raphael reveals his true identity and returns to heaven. Tobit then utters his
beautiful hymn of praise. Before dying, Tobit tells his son to leave Nineveh
because God will destroy that wicked city. After Tobiah buries his father and
mother, he and his family depart for Media, where he later learns that the
destruction of Nineveh has taken place.
The inspired author of the
book used the literary form of religious novel (as in Jonah and Judith) for the
purpose of instruction and edification. There may have been a historical
nucleus around which the story was composed, but this possibility has nothing
to do with the teaching of the book. The seemingly historical data-names of
kings, cities, etc.-are used merely as vivid details to create interest and
charm.
Although the Book of Tobit
is usually listed with the historical books, it more correctly stands midway
between them and the wisdom literature. It contains numerous maxims like those
found in the wisdom books (cf 
⇒
 Tobit 4:3-19,
⇒
 21; 
⇒
 12:6-10;
⇒
 14:7, 9) as well as
the customary sapiential themes: fidelity to the law, the intercessory function
of angels, piety toward parents, the purity of marriage, reverence for the
dead, and the value of almsgiving, prayer, and fasting. The book makes Tobit a
relative of 
Ahiqar
, a hero of ancient Near Eastern folklore.
Written in Aramaic, the
original of the book was lost for centuries. The Greek translation, existing in
three different recensions, is our primary source. In 1955, fragments of the
book in Aramaic and in Hebrew were recovered from Cave IV at Qumran. These
texts are in substantial agreement with the Greek recension that has served as
the basis for the present translation.
The divisions of the Book
of Tobit are:
I.          
Tobit's
Ordeals (
⇒
 Tobit 1:3-
⇒
 3:6)
II.          
Sarah's
Plight (
⇒
 Tobit 3:7-17) 
III.          
Tobiah's
Journey and Marriage to Sarah (
⇒
4:1-
⇒
 9:6) 
IV.          
Tobiah's
Return; Cure of Tobit's Blindness (
⇒
10:1-
⇒
 11:18) 
V.          
Raphael
Reveals His Identity (
⇒
 Tobit 12:1-22) 
VI.          
Tobit's
Song of Praise (
⇒
 Tobit 13:1-18) 
VII.          
Epilogue
(
⇒
 Tobit 14:1-15)