1
[1]
 This book tells the story of Tobit, son of
Tobiel, son of Hananiel, son of Aduel, son of Gabael of the family of Asiel, of
the tribe of Naphtali, 
2
who during the reign of Shalmaneser, 
[2]
king of Assyria, was taken captive from Thisbe, which is south of Kedesh
Naphtali in upper Galilee, above and to the west of Asser, north of Phogor. 
3
I, Tobit, have walked all the days of my life
on the paths of truth and righteousness. I performed many charitable works for
my kinsmen and my people who had been deported with me to Nineveh, in Assyria. 
4
When I lived as a young man in my own country,
Israel, the entire tribe of my forefather Naphtali had broken away from the
house of David and from Jerusalem. This city had been singled out of all
Israel's tribes, so that they all might offer sacrifice in the place where the
temple, God's dwelling, had been built and consecrated for all generations to
come. 
5
[3]
 All my kinsmen, like the rest of the tribe of
my forefather Naphtali, used to offer sacrifice on all the mountains of Galilee
as well as to the young bull which Jeroboam, king of Israel, had made in Dan. 
6
[4]
 I, for my part, would often make the
pilgrimage alone to Jerusalem for the festivals, as is prescribed for all
Israel by perpetual decree. Bringing with me the first fruits of the field and
the firstlings of the flock, together with a tenth of my income and the first
shearings of the sheep, I would hasten to Jerusalem 
7
and present them to the priests, Aaron's sons,
at the altar. To the Levites who were doing service in Jeusalem I would give
the tithe of grain, wine, olive oil, pomegranates, figs, and other fruits. And
except for sabbatical years, I used to give a second tithe in money, which each
year I would go and disburse in Jerusalem. 
8
The third tithe I gave to orphans and widows,
and to converts who were living with the Israelites. Every third year I would
bring them this offering, and we ate it in keeping with the decree of the
Mosaic law and the commands of Deborah, the mother of my father Tobiel; for
when my father died, he left me an orphan. 
9
When I reached manhood, I married Anna, a woman
of our own lineage. By her I had a son whom I named Tobiah. 
10
Now, after I had been deported to Nineveh, all
my brothers and relatives ate the food of heathens, 
11
but I refrained from eating that kind of food. 
12
Because of this wholehearted service of God, 
13
the Most High granted me favor and status with
Shalmaneser, so that I became purchasing agent for all his needs. 
14
[5]
 Every now and then until his death I would go
to Media to buy goods for him. I also deposited several pouches containing a
great sum of money with my kinsman Gabael, son of Gabri, who lived at Rages, in
Media. 
15
[6]
 But when Shalmaneser died and his son
Sennacherib succeeded him as king, the roads to Media became unsafe, so I could
no longer go there. 
16
During Shalmaneser's reign I performed many
charitable works for my kinsmen and my people. 
17
[7]
 I would give my bread to the hungry and my
clothing to the naked. If I saw one of my people who had died and been thrown
outside the walls of Nineveh, I would bury him. 
18
I also buried anyone whom Sennacherib slew when
he returned as a fugitive from Judea during the days of judgment decreed
against him by the heavenly King because of the blasphemies he had uttered. In
his rage he killed many Israelites, but I used to take their bodies by stealth
and bury them; so when Sennacherib looked for them, he could not find them. 
19
But a certain citizen of Nineveh informed the
king that it was I who buried the dead. When I found out that the king knew all
about me and wanted to put me to death, I went into hiding; then in my fear I
took to flight. 
20
Afterward, all my property was confiscated; I
was left with nothing. All that I had was taken to the king's palace, except
for my wife Anna and my son Tobiah. 
21
[8]
 But less than forty days later the king was
assassinated by two of his sons, who then escaped into the mountains of Ararat.
His son Esarhaddon, who succeeded him as king, placed Ahiqar, my brother
Anael's son, in charge of all the accounts of his kingdom, so that he took
control over the entire administration. 
22
Then Ahiqar interceded on my behalf, and I was
able to return to Nineveh. For under Sennacherib, king of Assyria, Ahiqar had
been chief cupbearer, keeper of the seal, administrator, and treasurer; and
Esarhaddon reappointed him. He was a close relative-in fact, my nephew. 
1
 [1] Tobit: in the fragments of the
book found at Qumran, is given as Tobi, an abbreviated form of Tobiyah
(
⇒
 Tobit 1:9; 
⇒
 Ezra 2:60)
or of Tobiyabu (
⇒
 2 Chron 17:8), a name which means
"Yahweh is good." Tobiel, "God is good"; Hananiel,
"God is merciful." The book abounds in theophoric names. 
2
 [2] Shalmaneser (V) (727-722 B.C.):
began the siege of Samaria; the inhabitants of the northern kingdom were taken
into captivity by his successor, Sargon II (722-705). Thisbe and Phogor: towns
of Galilee that have not been identified; Thisbe in Gilead was perhaps the
birthplace of Elijah. Kedesh: cf 
⇒
 Joshua 20:7.
Asser: Hazor (
⇒
 Joshua 11:1).
3
 [5] Jeroboam established
sanctuaries in Dan and Bethel so that the people would no longer go to
Jerusalem for the festivals. The gold statues of bulls which he placed in the
sanctuaries were considered the throne of Yahweh; but the people soon came to
worship the images themselves. Jeroboam also encouraged the high places or
hilltop shrines (
⇒
 1 Kings 12:26-33).
4
 [6] (6-8) Perpetual decree:
⇒
 Deut 12:11, 
⇒
 13-14.
Refusing to worship at Jeroboam's shrines, the faithful Tobit continued to
bring his offerings to Jerusalem; see 
⇒
 2 Chron
11:16. For the various tithes, cf 
⇒
 Numbers
18:20-32; 
⇒
 2 Chron 31:4-6;
⇒
 Deut 14:22-29;
⇒
 26:12-13.
5
 [14] A great sum of money:
literally, "ten silver talents," about ten thousand dollars. Rages:
modern Rai, about five miles southeast of Teheran. Media: the northwestern part
of modern Iran.
6
 [15] Sennacherib (705-681 B.C.):
the son of Sargon (722-705 B.C.); neither was descended from Shalmaneser.
Inconsistencies such as this point to the fact that the Book of Tobit is a
religious novel (see Introduction; also notes on 
⇒
5:6; 
⇒
 14:15).
7
 [17] (17-18) Tobit risked his own
life to bury the dead. Deprivation of burial was viewed with horror by the
Jews. Cf 
⇒
 Tobit 4:3-4;
⇒
 6:15; 
⇒
 14:12-13.
8
 [21] Esarhaddon: 681-669 B.C.
Ahiqar: a hero of ancient folklore, known for his outstanding wisdom. The Story
(or Wisdom) of Ahiqar was very popular in antiquity and is extant in many
different forms: Aramaic, Syriac, Armenian, Arabic (Arabian Nights), Greek
(Aesop's Fables), Slavonic, Ethiopic, and Romanian. The sacred author makes
Tobit the uncle of the famous Ahiqar in order to enhance Tobit's own prestige.
See note on 
⇒
 Tobit 14:10.