1
[1]
 Then Tobit composed this joyful prayer:
Blessed be God who lives forever, because his kingdom lasts for all ages. 
2
For he scourges and then has mercy; he casts
down to the depths of the nether world, and he brings up from the great abyss.
No one can escape his hand. 
3
Praise him, you Israelites, before the
Gentiles, for though he has scattered you among them, 
4
he has shown you his greatness even there.
Exalt him before every living being, because he is the Lord our God, our Father
and God forever. 
5
He scourged you for your iniquities, but will
again have mercy on you all. He will gather you from all the Gentiles among
whom you have been scattered. 
6
When you turn back to him with all your heart,
to do what is right before him, Then he will turn back to you, and no longer
hide his face from you. So now consider what he has done for you, and praise
him with full voice. Bless the Lord of righteousness, and exalt the King of the
ages. In the land of my exile I praise him, and show his power and majesty to a
sinful nation. "Turn back, you sinners! do the right before him: perhaps
he may look with favor upon you and show you mercy. 
7
"As for me, I exalt my God, and my spirit
rejoices in the King of heaven. 
8
Let all men speak of his majesty, and sing his
praises in Jerusalem." 
9
[2]
 O Jerusalem, holy city, he scourged you for
the works of your hands, but will again pity the children of the righteous. 
10
Praise the Lord for his goodness, and bless the
King of the ages, so that his tent may be rebuilt in you with joy. May he
gladden within you all who were captives; all who were ravaged may he cherish
within you for all generations to come. 
11
A bright light will shine to all parts of the
earth; many nations shall come to you from afar, And the inhabitants of all the
limits of the earth, drawn to you by the name of the Lord God, Bearing in their
hands their gifts for the King of heaven. Every generation shall give joyful
praise in you, and shall call you the chosen one, through all ages forever. 
12
Accursed are all who speak a harsh word against
you; accursed are all who destroy you and pull down your walls, And all who
overthrow your towers and set fire to your homes; but forever blessed are all
those who build you up. 
13
Go, then, rejoice over the children of the
righteous, who shall all be gathered together and shall bless the Lord of the
ages. 
14
Happy are those who love you, and happy those
who rejoice in your prosperity. Happy are all the men who shall grieve over
you, over all your chastisements, For they shall rejoice in you as they behold
all your joy forever. 
15
My spirit blesses the Lord, the great King; 
16
Jerusalem shall be rebuilt as his home forever.
Happy for me if a remnant of my offspring survive to see your glory and to
praise the King of heaven! The gates of Jerusalem shall be built with sapphire
and emerald, and all your walls with precious stones. The towers of Jerusalem
shall be built with gold, and their battlements with pure gold. 
17
The streets of Jerusalem shall be paved with
rubies and stones of Ophir; 
18
The gates of Jerusalem shall sing hymns of
gladness, and all her houses shall cry out, "Alleluia! "Blessed be
God who has raised you up! may he be blessed for all ages!" For in you
they shall praise his holy name forever. The end of Tobit's hymn of praise. 
1
 [1] (1-18) Tobit's hymn of praise
(cf 
⇒
 Exodus 15:1-18; 
⇒
 Judith
16:1-17) is divided into two parts. The first part
(
⇒
 Tobit 13:1-8) is a song of praise that echoes
themes from the hymns and psalms of the kingdom; the second (
⇒
13:9-18) is addressed to Jerusalem in the style of the prophets who
spoke of a new and ideal Jerusalem (Isaiah 60); cf Rev 21. 
2
 [9] Works of your hands: idols.