1
Meanwhile, day by day, Tobit was keeping track
of the time Tobiah would need to go and to return. When the number of days was
reached and his son did not appear, 
2
he said, "I wonder what has happened.
Perhaps he has been detained there; or perhaps Gabael is dead, and there is no
one to give him the money." 
3
And he began to worry. 
4
His wife Anna said, "My son has perished
and is no longer among the living!" And she began to weep aloud and to
wail over her son: 
5
"Alas, my child, light of my eyes, that I
let you make this journey!" 
6
But Tobit kept telling her: "Hush, do not
think about it, my love; he is safe! Probably they have to take care of some
unexpected business there. The man who is traveling with him is trustworthy,
and is one of our own kinsmen. So do not worry over him, my love. He will be
here soon." 
7
But she retorted, "Stop it, and do not lie
to me! My child has perished!" She would go out and keep watch all day at
the road her son had taken, and she ate nothing. At sunset she would go back
home to wail and cry the whole night through, getting no sleep at all.Now at
the end of the fourteen-day wedding celebration which Raguel had sworn to hold
for his daughter, Tobiah went to him and said: "Please let me go, for I
know that my father and mother do not believe they will ever see me again. So I
beg you, father, let me go back to my father. I have already told you how I
left him." 
8
Raguel said to Tobiah: "Stay, my child,
stay with me. I am sending messengers to your father Tobit, and they will give
him news of you." 
9
But Tobiah insisted, "No, I beg you to let
me go back to my father." 
10
Raguel then promptly handed over to Tobiah Sarah
his wife, together with half of all his property: male and female slaves, oxen
and sheep, asses and camels, clothing, money, and household goods. 
11
Bidding them farewell, he let them go. He
embraced Tobiah and said to him: "Good-bye, my son. Have a safe journey.
May the Lord of heaven grant prosperity to you and to your wife Sarah. And may
I see children of yours before I die!" 
12
Then he kissed his daughter Sarah and said to
her: "My daughter, honor your father-in-law and your mother-in-law,
because from now on they are as much your parents as the ones who brought you
into the world. Go in peace, my daughter; let me hear good reports about you as
long as I live." Finally he said good-bye to them and sent them away. 
13
Then Edna said to Tobiah: "My child and
beloved kinsman, may the Lord bring you back safely, and may I live long enough
to see children of you and of my daughter Sarah before I die. Before the Lord,
I entrust my daughter to your care. Never cause her grief at any time in your
life. Go in peace, my child. From now on I am your mother, and Sarah is your
beloved. May all of us be prosperous all the days of our lives." She
kissed them both and sent them away in peace. 
14
When Tobiah left Raguel, he was full of
happiness and joy, and he blessed the Lord of heaven and earth, the King of
all, for making his journey so successful. Finally he said good-bye to Raguel
and his wife Edna, and added, "May I honor you all the days of my
life!" 