1
Then Tobiah replied to his father Tobit:
"Everything that you have commanded me, father, I will do. 
2
But how shall I be able to obtain the money
from him, since he does not know me nor do I know him? What can I show him to
make him recognize me and trust me, so that he will give me the money? I do not
even know which roads to take for the journey into Media!" 
3
[1]
 Tobit answered his son Tobiah: "We
exchanged signatures on a document written in duplicate; I divided it into two
parts, and each of us kept one; his copy I put with the money. Think of it,
twenty years have already passed since I deposited that money! So now, my son,
find yourself a trustworthy man who will make the journey with you. We will, of
course, give him a salary when you return; but get back that money from
Gabael." 
4
[2]
 Tobiah went to look for someone acquainted
with the roads who would travel with him to Media. As soon as he went out, he
found the angel Raphael standing before him, though he did not know that this
was an angel of God. 
5
Tobiah said to him, "Who are you, young
man?" He replied "I am an Israelite, one of your kinsmen. I have come
here to work." Tobiah said, "Do you know the way to Media?" 
6
[3]
 The other replied: "Yes, I have been
there many times. I know the place well and I know all the routes. I have often
traveled to Media; I used to stay with our kinsman Gabael, who lives at Rages in
Media. It is a good two days' travel from Ecbatana to Rages, for Rages is
situated at the mountains, Ecbatana out on the plateau." 
7
Tobiah said to him, "Wait for me, young
man, till I go back and tell my father; for I need you to make the journey with
me. I will, of course, pay you." 
8
Raphael replied, "Very well, I will wait
for you; but do not be long." 
9
Tobiah went back to tell his father Tobit what
had happened. He said to him, "I have just found a man who is one of our
own Israelite kinsmen!" Tobit said, "Call the man, so that I may find
out what family and tribe he comes from, and whether he is trustworthy enough
to travel with you, son." Tobiah went out to summon the man, saying,
"Young man, my father would like to see you." 
10
[4]
 When Raphael entered the house, Tobit greeted
him first. Raphael said, "Hearty greetings to you!" Tobit replied:
"What joy is left for me any more? Here I am, a blind man who cannot see
God's sunlight, but must remain in darkness, like the dead who no longer see
the light! Though alive, I am among the dead. I can hear a man's voice, but I
cannot see him." Raphael said, "Take courage! God has healing in
store for you; so take courage!" Tobit then said: "My son Tobiah
wants to go to Media. Can you go with him to show him the way? I will of course
pay you, brother." Raphael answered: "Yes, I can go with him, for I
know all the routes. I have often traveled to Media and crossed all its plains
and mountains; so I know every road well." 
11
Tobit asked, "Brother, tell me, please,
what family and tribe are you from?" 
12
Raphael said: "Why? Do you need a tribe
and a family? Or are you looking for a hired man to travel with your son?"
Tobit replied, "I wish to know truthfully whose son you are, brother, and
what your name is." 
13
[5]
 Raphael answered, "I am Azariah, son of
Hananiah the elder, one of your own kinsmen." 
14
Tobit exclaimed: "Welcome! God save you,
brother! Do not be provoked with me, brother, for wanting to learn the truth
about your family. So it turns out that you are a kinsman, and from a noble and
good line! I knew Hananiah and Nathaniah, the two sons of Shemaiah the elder;
with me they used to make the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where we would worship
together. No, they did not stray from the right path; your kinsmen are good
men. You are certainly of good lineage, and welcome!" 
15
[6]
 Then he added: "For each day you are away
I will give you the normal wages, plus expenses for you and for my son. If you
go with my son, 
16
I will even add a bonus to your wages!"
Raphael replied: "I will go with him; have no fear. In good health we
shall leave you, and in good health we shall return to you, for the way is
safe." 
17
Tobit said, "God bless you, brother."
Then he called his son and said to him: "My son, prepare whatever you need
for the journey, and set out with your kinsman. May God in heaven protect you
on the way and bring you back to me safe and sound; and may his angel accompany
you for safety, my son." Before setting out on his journey, Tobiah kissed
his father and mother. Tobit said to him, "Have a safe journey." 
18
But his mother began to weep. She said to
Tobit: "Why have you decided to send my child away? Is he not the staff to
which we cling, ever there with us in all that we do? 
19
I hope more money is not your chief concern!
Rather let it be a ransom for our son! 
20
What the Lord has given us to live on is
certainly enough for us." 
21
Tobit reassured her: "Have no such thought.
Our son will leave in good health and come back to us in good health. Your own
eyes will see the day when he returns to you safe and sound. 
22
[7]
 So, no such thought; do not worry about them, my
love. For a good angel will go with him, his journey will be successful, and he
will return unharmed." 
1
 [3] Document: in Greek
cheirographon. In the Middle Ages, notably in England, a deed and its duplicate
were written on one piece of parchment, with the Latin word chirographum
inscribed across the top of the sheet or between the two copies of the text.
The document was then cut in two in either a straight or a wavy line, the parts
being given to the persons concerned. Perhaps this procedure derived from the
present verse of Tobit. Duplicate documents, usually one open and the other
sealed, are well known from the ancient Near East. 
2
 [4] He did not know: the theme of
an angel in disguise occurs frequently in folklore as well as in the Old
Testament (Genesis 18; cf 
⇒
 Hebrews 13:2).
3
 [6] It is a good two days' travel
from Ecbatana to Rages: Alexander's army took eleven days in forced marches to
cover this distance, about 180 miles. The author is merely using popular
impressions about faraway places; he is not teaching geography. (See notes on
⇒
 Tobit 1:15; 
⇒
 3:7 and
Introduction.)
4
 [10] Hearty greetings and what joy
form a wordplay on the Greek verb chairein, "to greet" and "to
be joyful."
5
 [13] (13-14) Azariah, "Yahweh
helps"; Hananiah, "Yahweh is merciful"; Nathaniah, "Yahweh
gives"; Shemaiah, "Yahweh hears."
6
 [15] The normal wages: literally,
"a drachma," about seventeen cents, a day's wage for a workingman.
7
 [22] My love: literally,
"sister," a term of endearment applied to one's wife; cf 
⇒
7:11, 
⇒
 15;
⇒
 8:4, 
⇒
 21;
⇒
 10:6, 
⇒
 13;
⇒
 Song 4:9, 
⇒
 10,
⇒
 12; 
⇒
 5:1,
2. A good angel: a reference to the guardian angel,
though Tobit does not know, of course, that Raphael himself, disguised as
Azariah, is the good angel in this case.