1
Then she stopped weeping. 
2
When the boy left home, accompanied by the
angel, the dog followed Tobiah out of the house and went with them. The
travelers walked till nightfall, and made camp beside the Tigris River. 
3
Now when the boy went down to wash his feet in
the river, a large fish suddenly leaped out of the water and tried to swallow
his foot. He shouted in alarm. 
4
But the angel said to him, "Take hold of
the fish and don't let it get away!" The boy seized the fish and hauled it
up on the shore. 
5
[1]
 The angel then told him: "Cut the fish
open and take out its gall, heart, and liver, and keep them with you; but throw
away the entrails. Its gall, heart, and liver make useful medicines." 
6
After the lad had cut the fish open, he put
aside the gall, heart, and liver. Then he broiled and ate part of the fish; the
rest he salted and kept for the journey. 
7
Afterward they traveled on together till they
were near Media. The boy asked the angel this question: "Brother Azariah,
what medicinal value is there in the fish's heart, liver, and gall?" 
8
He answered: "As regards the fish's heart
and liver, if you burn them so that the smoke surrounds a man or a woman who is
afflicted by a demon or evil spirit, the affliction will leave him completely,
and no demons will ever return to him again. 
9
And as for the gall, if you rub it on the eyes
of a man who has cataracts, blowing into his eyes right on the cataracts, his
sight will be restored." 
10
When they had entered Media and were getting
close to Ecbatana, 
11
Raphael said to the boy, "Brother
Tobiah!" He answered, "Yes, what is it?" Raphael continued:
"Tonight we must stay with Raguel, who is a relative of yours. He has a daughter
named Sarah, 
12
but no other child. Since you are Sarah's
closest relative, you before all other men have the right to marry her. Also,
her father's estate is rightfully yours to inherit. Now the girl is sensible,
courageous, and very beautiful; and her father loves her dearly." 
13
[2]
 He continued: "Since you have the right
to marry her, listen to me, brother. Tonight I will ask the girl's father to
let us have her as your bride. When we return from Rages, we will hold the
wedding feast for her. I know that Raguel cannot keep her from you or let her
become engaged to another man; that would be a capital crime according to the
decree in the Book of Moses, and he knows that it is your right, before all other
men, to marry his daughter. So heed my words, brother; tonight we must speak
for the girl, so that we may have her engaged to you. And when we return from
Rages, we will take her and bring her back with us to your house." 
14
Tobiah objected, however: "Brother
Azariah, I have heard that this woman has already been married seven times, and
that her husbands died in their bridal chambers. On the very night they
approached her, they dropped dead. And I have heard it said that it was a demon
who killed them. 
15
So now I too am afraid of this demon. Because
he loves her, he does not harm her; but he does slay any man who wishes to come
close to her. I am my father's only child. If I should die, I would bring my
father and mother down to their grave in sorrow over me. And they have no other
son to bury them!" 
16
Raphael said to him: "Do you not remember
your father's orders? He commanded you to marry a woman from your own family.
So now listen to me, brother; do not give another thought to this demon, but
marry Sarah. I know that tonight you shall have her for your wife! 
17
When you go into the bridal chamber, take the
fish's liver and heart, and place them on the embers for the incense. 
18
[3]
 As soon as the demon smells the odor they give
off, he will flee and never again show himself near her. Then when you are
about to have intercourse with her, both of you first rise up to pray. Beg the
Lord of heaven to show you mercy and grant you deliverance. But do not be
afraid, for she was set apart for you before the world existed. You will save
her, and she will go with you. And I suppose that you will have children by
her, who will take the place of brothers for you. So do not worry." When
Tobiah heard Raphael say that she was his kinswoman, of his own family's
lineage, he fell deeply in love with her, and his heart became set on her. 
1
 [5] Its gall . . . medicines:
belief in the healing power of these organs was common among even the
physicians of antiquity. 
2
 [13] Raguel . . . Book of Moses:
⇒
 Numbers 36:6-8 prescribed marriage within the
ancestral tribe, but no death penalty is mentioned.
3
 [18] Rise up to pray: prayer is
needed to drive out the demon.