1
Tobit died peacefully at the age of a hundred
and twelve, and received an honorable burial in Nineveh. 
2
He was sixty-two years old when he lost his
eyesight, and after he recovered it he lived in prosperity, giving alms and
continually blessing God and praising the divine Majesty. 
3
Just before he died, he called his son Tobiah
and Tobiah's seven sons, and gave him this command: "Son, take your
children 
4
[1]
 and flee into Media, for I believe God's word
which was spoken by Nahum against Nineveh. It shall all happen, and shall
overtake Assyria and Nineveh; indeed, whatever was said by Israel's prophets,
whom God commissioned, shall occur. Not one of all the oracles shall remain
unfulfilled, but everything shall take place in the time appointed for it. So
it will be safer in Media than in Assyria or Babylon. For I know and believe
that whatever God has spoken will be accomplished. It shall happen, and not a
single word of the prophecies shall prove false. "As for our kinsmen who
dwell in Israel, they shall all be scattered and led away into exile from the
Good Land. The entire country of Israel shall become desolate; even Samaria and
Jerusalem shall become desolate! God's temple there shall be burnt to the
ground and shall be desolate for a while. 
5
[2]
 But God will again have mercy on them and
bring them back to the land of Israel. They shall rebuild the temple, but it
will not be like the first one, until the era when the appointed times shall be
completed. Afterward all of them shall return from their exile, and they shall
rebuild Jerusalem with splendor. In her the temple of God shall also be
rebuilt; yes, it will be rebuilt for all generations to come, just as the
prophets of Israel said of her. 
6
[3]
 All the nations of the world shall be
converted and shall offer God true worship; all shall abandon their idols which
have deceitfully led them into error, 
7
and shall bless the God of the ages in
righteousness. Because all the Israelites who are to be saved in those days
will truly be mindful of God, they shall be gathered together and go to
Jerusalem; in security shall they dwell forever in the land of Abraham, which
will be given over to them. Those who sincerely love God shall rejoice, but
those who become guilty of sin shall completely disappear from the land. 
8
"Now, as for you, my son, depart from
Nineveh; do not remain here. 
9
"Now, children, I give you this command:
serve God faithfully and do what is right before him; you must tell your
children to do what is upright and to give alms, to be mindful of God and at
all times to bless his name sincerely and with all their strength. 
10
[4]
 The day you bury your mother next to me, do
not even stay overnight within the confines of the city. For I see that people
here shamelessly commit all sorts of wickedness and treachery. Think, my son,
of all that Nadab did to Ahiqar, the very one who brought him up: Ahiqar went
down alive into the earth! Yet God made Nadab's disgraceful crime rebound
against him. Ahiqar came out again into the light, but Nadab went into the
everlasting darkness, for he had tried to kill Ahiqar. Because Ahiqar had given
alms to me, he escaped from the deadly trap Nadab had set for him. But Nadab
himself fell into the deadly trap, and it destroyed him. 
11
So, my children, note well what almsgiving
does, and also what wickedness does - it kills! But now my spirit is about to
leave me." 
12
They placed him on his bed and he died; and he
received an honorable burial. When Tobiah's mother died, he buried her next to
his father. He then departed with his wife and children for Media, where he
settled in Ecbatana with his father-in-law Raguel. 
13
He took respectful care of his aging
father-in-law and mother-in-law; and he buried them at Ecbatana in Media. Then
he inherited Raguel's estate as well as that of his father Tobit. 
14
He died at the venerable age of a hundred and
seventeen. 
15
[5]
 But before he died, he heard of the
destruction of Nineveh and saw its effects. He witnessed the exile of the
city's inhabitants when Cyaxares, king of Media, led them captive into Media.
Tobiah praised God for all that he had done against the citizens of Nineveh and
Assyria. Before dying he rejoiced over Nineveh's destruction, and he blessed
the Lord God forever and ever. Amen. 
1
 [4] (4-5) Nahum: one of the minor
prophets, whose book contains oracles of doom against Nineveh. Here, in keeping
with the period to which he assigns his story, the sacred author makes Tobit
speak as if the punishment of Nineveh, the destruction of Jerusalem (587 B.
C.), the exile from Judah and the return, would all take place in the future.
The technique of using the facts of past history as seemingly future
predictions, is a frequent device of apocalyptic writers. The Good Land: a
favorite name for the promised land. Cf 
⇒
 Deut 1:35;
⇒
 3:25; 
⇒
 4:21,
⇒
 22. 
2
 [5] Until the era . . . completed:
a reference to the advent of Messianic times, in which a new, more perfect
temple was to be expected. Cf 
⇒
 Hebrews 9:1-14.
3
 [6] Conversion of the Gentiles is
also to come in the Messianic era.
4
 [10] Nadab: In the Story of Ahiqar,
the hero Ahiqar, chancellor under the Assyrian kings Sennacherib and
Esarhaddon, adopts his nephew Nadab and prepares him to become his successor.
But Nadab treacherously plots to have his uncle put to death. Ahiqar hides in a
friend's house, and is finally vindicated (came out again into the light) when
Nadab's scheme is discovered. Thereupon Nadab is thrown into a dungeon where he
dies (went into everlasting darkness). It was Ahiqar's almsgiving that
delivered him from death; see note on 
⇒
 Tobit 2:2.
5
 [15] Cyaxares: Nabopolassar, king
of Babylon, and Cyaxares conquered and destroyed Nineveh in 612 B. C.; see note
on 
⇒
 Tobit 1:15.