1
Then they left and began their return journey.
When they were near Kaserin, just before Nineveh, 
2
Raphael said: "You know how we left your
father. 
3
Let us hurry on ahead of your wife to prepare
the house while the rest of the party are still on the way." 
4
So they both went on ahead and Raphael said to
Tobiah, "Have the gall in your hand!" And the dog ran along behind
them. 
5
Meanwhile, Anna sat watching the road by which
her son was to come. 
6
When she saw him coming, she exclaimed to his
father, "Tobit, your son is coming, and the man who traveled with
him!" 
7
Raphael said to Tobiah before he reached his
father: "I am certain that his eyes will be opened. 
8
Smear the fish gall on them. This medicine will
make the cataracts shrink and peel off from his eyes; then your father will again
be able to see the light of day." 
9
Then Anna ran up to her son, threw her arms
around him, and said to him, "Now that I have seen you again, son, I am
ready to die!" And she sobbed aloud. 
10
Tobit got up and stumbled out through the
courtyard gate. Tobiah went up to him 
11
with the fish gall in his hand, and holding him
firmly, blew into his eyes. "Courage, father," he said. 
12
Next he smeared the medicine on his eyes, 
13
and it made them smart. Then, beginning at the
corners of Tobit's eyes, Tobiah used both hands to peel off the cataracts. When
Tobit saw his son, he threw his arms around him 
14
and wept. He exclaimed, "I can see you,
son, the light of my eyes!" Then he said: "Blessed be God, and
praised be his great name, and blessed be all his holy angels. May his holy
name be praised throughout all the ages, 
15
Because it was he who scourged me, and it is he
who has had mercy on me. Behold, I now see my son Tobiah!" Then Tobit went
back in, rejoicing and praising God with full voice. Tobiah told his father
that his journey had been a success; that he had brought back the money; and
that he had married Raguel's daughter Sarah, who would arrive shortly, for she
was approaching the gate of Nineveh. ' 
16
Rejoicing and praising God, Tobit went out to
the gate of Nineveh to meet his daughter-in-law. When the people of Nineveh saw
him walking along briskly, with no one leading him by the hand, they were
amazed. 
17
Before them all Tobit proclaimed how God had
mercifully restored sight to his eyes. When Tobit reached Sarah, the wife of
his son Tobiah, he greeted her: "Welcome, my daughter! Blessed be your God
for bringing you to us, daughter! Blessed are your father and your mother.
Blessed is my son Tobiah, and blessed are you, daughter! Welcome to your home
with blessing and joy. Come in, daughter!" That day there was joy for all
the Jews who lived in Nineveh. 
18
Ahiqar and his nephew Nadab also came to
rejoice with Tobit. They celebrated Tobiah's wedding feast for seven happy
days, and he received many gifts. 