1
[1]
[2]
 Joram, son of Ahab,
became king of Israel in Samaria (in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat, king
of Judah, and he reigned for twelve years). 
2
He did evil in the LORD'S sight, though not as
much as his father and mother. He did away with the pillar of Baal, which his
father had made, 
3
but he still clung to the sin to which
Jeroboam, son of Nebat, had lured Israel; this he did not give up. 
4
Now Mesha, king of Moab, who raised sheep, used
to pay the king of Israel as tribute a hundred thousand lambs and the wool of a
hundred thousand rams. 
5
But when Ahab died, the king of Moab had
rebelled against the king of Israel. 
6
Joram as king mustered all Israel, and when he
set out on a campaign from Samaria, 
7
he sent the king of Judah the message:
"The king of Moab is in rebellion against me. Will you join me in battle
against Moab?" "I will," he replied. "You and I shall be as
one, your people and mine, and your horses and mine as well." 
8
They discussed the route for their attack, and
settled upon the route through the desert of Edom. 
9
So the king of Israel set out, accompanied by
the king of Judah and the king of Edom. After their roundabout journey of seven
days the water gave out for the army and for the animals with them. 
10
"Alas!" exclaimed the king of Israel.
"The LORD has called together these three kings to put them in the grasp of
Moab." 
11
But the king of Judah asked, "Is there no
prophet of the LORD here through whom we may inquire of the LORD?" One of
the officers of the king of Israel replied, "Elisha, son of Shaphat, who
poured water on the hands of Elijah, is here." 
12
"He has the word of the LORD," the
king of Judah agreed. So the kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom went down to
Elisha. 
13
"What do you want with me?" Elisha
asked the king of Israel. "Go to the prophets of your father and to the
prophets of your mother." "No," the king of Israel replied.
"The LORD has called these three kings together to put them in the grasp
of Moab." 
14
Then Elisha said, "As the LORD of hosts
lives, whom I serve, were it not that I respect the king of Judah, I should
neither look at you nor notice you at all. 
15
Now get me a minstrel." When the minstrel
played, the power of the LORD came upon Elisha 
16
and he announced: "Thus says the LORD,
'Provide many catch basins in this wadi.' 
17
For the LORD says, 'Though you will see neither
wind nor rain, yet this wadi will be filled with water for you, your livestock,
and your pack animals to drink.' 
18
And since the LORD does not consider this
enough, he will also deliver Moab into your grasp. 
19
You shall destroy every fortified city, fell
every fruit tree, stop up all the springs, and ruin every fertile field with
stones." 
20
In the morning, at the time of the sacrifice,
water came from the direction of Edom and filled the land. 
21
Meanwhile, all Moab heard that the kings had
come to give them battle; every man capable of bearing arms was called up and
stationed at the border. 
22
[2]
 Early that morning, when the sun shone on the
water, the Moabites saw the water at a distance as red as blood. 
23
"This is blood!" they exclaimed.
"The kings have fought among themselves and killed one another. Quick! To
the spoils, Moabites!" 
24
But when they reached the camp of Israel, the
Israelites rose up and attacked the Moabites, who fled from them. They ranged
through the countryside striking down the Moabites, and 
25
[3]
 destroying the cities; each of them cast
stones onto every fertile field till they had loaded it down; all the springs
they stopped up and every useful tree they felled. Finally only Kir-hareseth
was left behind its stone walls, and the slingers had surrounded it and were
attacking it. 
26
When he saw that he was losing the battle, the
king of Moab took seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Aram,
but he failed. 
27
[4]
 So he took his first-born, his heir apparent,
and offered him as a holocaust upon the wall. The wrath against Israel was so
great that they gave up the siege and returned to their own land. 
1
 [1] The sequence of the reigns
between Ahab and Jehu of Israel may be reconstructed as follows: Jehoshaphat of
Judah outlived Ahab by a short time, so that Ahaziah of Israel was his
contemporary. Jehoram of Judah succeeded his father Jehoshaphat while Ahaziah
of Israel was still alive. Jehoram (Joram) of Israel became king, following his
brother Ahaziah, in the second year of Jehoram of Judah (
⇒
 2
Kings 1:17); this is one datum on which the earliest Greek evidence
and the standard Hebrew text are in agreement.
2
 [22] The two Jehorams were
contemporary for much of their reigns; Jehoram of Judah was succeeded by
Ahaziah something more than a year before Jehu did away with the rulers of both
kingdoms (
⇒
 2 Kings 9:1-29). The Moabite campaign of
⇒
 2 Kings 3:4-27 is thus best placed under the two
Kings Jehoram, before the Edomite rebellion mentioned in 
⇒
 2
Kings 8:20. In the received Hebrew text, Jehoshaphat has been made
the Judahite protagonist in the campaign against Moab as a tribute to his
piety; this assimilates the story of 2 Kings 3 to that of 1 Kings 22, but
creates difficulties in the chronology which the extant data leave partly
unresolved. An older practice for stories of the Israelite kings was to leave
them and their fellow kings without identification by name; cf
⇒
 2 Kings 6:8-7, 
⇒
 20.
The name of Jehoshaphat has been omitted from a number of places in 2 Kings
3-8, in this translation; cf 
⇒
 1 Kings 22:51. 
2
 [22] Red as blood: possibly caused
by the red sandstone of the Wadi Zered (
⇒
 Deut
2:13), south of Moab.
3
 [25] Kir-hareseth: modern Kerak,
east of the Dead Sea; cf 
⇒
 Isaiah 16:7,
⇒
 11; 
⇒
 Jeremiah 48:31,
⇒
 36.
4
 [27] The wrath against Israel:
probably the wrath of Chemosh, the Moabite god to whom the child was offered.
He was feared by the Israelites who lost heart on foreign soil.