1
At that time Joshua summoned the Reubenites,
the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh 
2
and said to them: "You have done all that
Moses, the servant of the LORD, commanded you, and have obeyed every command I
gave you. 
3
For many years now you have not once abandoned
your kinsmen, but have faithfully carried out the commands of the LORD, your
God. 
4
Since, therefore, the LORD, your God, has
settled your kinsmen as he promised them, you may now return to your tents
beyond the Jordan; to your own land, which Moses, the servant of the LORD, gave
you. 
5
But be very careful to observe the precept and
law which Moses, the servant of the LORD, enjoined upon you: love the LORD,
your God; follow him faithfully; keep his commandments; remain loyal to him;
and serve him with your whole heart and soul." 
6
Joshua then blessed them and sent them away to
their own tents. 
7
(For, to half the tribe of Manasseh Moses had
assigned land in Bashan; and to the other half Joshua had given a portion along
with their kinsmen west of the Jordan.) What Joshua said to them when he sent
them off to their tents with his blessing was, 
8
"Now that you are returning to your own
tents with great wealth, with very numerous livestock, with silver, gold,
bronze and iron, and with a very large supply of clothing, divide these spoils
of your enemies with your kinsmen there." 
9
So the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the
half-tribe of Manasseh left the other Israelites at Shiloh in the land of
Canaan and returned to the land of Gilead, their own property, which they had
received according to the LORD'S command through Moses. 
10
When the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the
half-tribe of Manasseh came to the region of the Jordan in the land of Canaan,
they built there at the Jordan a conspicuously large altar. 
11
[1]
 The other Israelites heard the report that the
Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had built an altar in
the region of the Jordan facing the land of Canaan, across from them, 
12
[2]
 and therefore they assembled their whole
community at Shiloh to declare war on them. 
13
First, however, they sent to the Reubenites,
the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in the land of Gilead an embassy
consisting of Phinehas, son of Eleazar the priest, 
14
and ten princes, one from every tribe of
Israel, each one being both prince and military leader of his ancestral house. 
15
When these came to the Reubenites, the Gadites,
and the half-tribe of Manasseh in the land of Gilead, they said to them: 
16
"The whole community of the LORD sends
this message: What act of treachery is this you have committed against the God
of Israel? You have seceded from the LORD this day, and rebelled against him by
building an altar of your own! 
17
For the sin of Peor, a plague came upon the
community of the LORD. 
18
We are still not free of that; must you now add
to it? You are rebelling against the LORD today and by tomorrow he will be
angry with the whole community of Israel! 
19
[3]
 If you consider the land you now possess
unclean, cross over to the land the LORD possesses, where the Dwelling of the
LORD stands, and share that with us. But do not rebel against the LORD, nor
involve us in rebellion, by building an altar of your own in addition to the
altar of the LORD, our God. 
20
[4]
 When Achan, son of Zerah, violated the ban,
did not wrath fall upon the entire community of Israel? Though he was but a
single man, he did not perish alone for his guilt!" 
21
The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe
of Manasseh replied to the military leaders of the Israelites: "The LORD
is the God of gods. 
22
[5]
 The LORD, the God of gods, knows and Israel
shall know. If now we have acted out of rebellion or treachery against the
LORD, our God, 
23
and if we have built an altar of our own to
secede from the LORD, or to offer holocausts, grain offerings or peace
offerings upon it, the LORD himself will exact the penalty. 
24
We did it rather out of our anxious concern
lest in the future your children should say to our children: 'What have you to
do with the LORD, the God of Israel? 
25
For the LORD has placed the Jordan as a
boundary between you and us. You descendants of Reuben and Gad have no share in
the LORD.' Thus your children would prevent ours from revering the LORD. 
26
So we decided to guard our interests by building
this altar of our own: not for holocausts or for sacrifices, 
27
but as evidence for you on behalf of ourselves
and our descendants, that we have the right to worship the LORD in his presence
with our holocausts, sacrifices, and peace offerings. Now in the future your
children cannot say to our children, 'You have no share in the LORD.' 
28
[6]
 Our thought was, that if in the future they
should speak thus to us or to our descendants, we could answer: 'Look at the
model of the altar of the LORD which our fathers made, not for holocausts or
for sacrifices, but to witness between you and us.' 
29
Far be it from us to rebel against the LORD or
to secede now from the LORD by building an altar for holocaust, grain offering,
or sacrifice in addition to the altar of the LORD, our God, which stands before
his Dwelling." 
30
When Phinehas the priest and the princes of the
community, the military leaders of the Israelites, heard what the Reubenites,
the Gadites and the Manassehites had to say, they were satisfied. 
31
Phinehas, son of Eleazar the priest, said to
the Reubenites, the Gadites and the Manassehites, "Now we know that the
LORD is with us. Since you have not committed this act of treachery against the
LORD, you have kept the Israelites free from punishment by the LORD." 
32
Phinehas, son of Eleazar the priest, and the
princes returned from the Reubenites and the Gadites in the land of Gilead to
the Israelites in the land of Canaan, and reported the matter to them. 
33
The report satisfied the Israelites, who
blessed God and decided against declaring war on the Reubenites and Gadites or
ravaging the land they occupied. 
34
[7]
 The Reubenites and the Gadites gave the altar
its name as a witness among them that the LORD is God. 
1
 [11] In the region of the Jordan
facing the land of Canaan: on the eastern side of the Jordan valley. The river
itself formed the boundary between these eastern tribes and the rest of the
tribes who lived in what was formerly Canaan-though the term Canaan could also
be used of both sides of the Jordan valley (cf 
⇒
22:10). The Transjordan tribes naturally built their altar in their
own territory. 
2
 [12] To declare war on them: the
western Israelites considered this altar, which seemed to violate the customary
unity of the sanctuary (
⇒
 Lev 17:1-9;
⇒
 Deut 12:4-14), as a sign of secession and
dangerous to national unity. The motives for the war were political as well as
religious.
3
 [19] Unclean: not sanctified by the
Dwelling of the Lord.
4
 [20] Achan . . . did not perish
alone: his guilt caused the failure of the first attack on Ai
(
⇒
 Joshua 7:4-23); this fact is adduced as an
argument for the solidarity and mutual responsibility of all the Israelites.
5
 [22] The LORD, the God of gods: the
Hebrew, which cannot be adequately rendered in English here, adds to the divine
name Yahweh ("the LORD") two synonymous words for "God," el
and elohim. The repetition of these three sacred words adds force to the
protestations of fidelity and innocence.
6
 [28] To witness: far from being
destined to form a rival sanctuary, the model of the altar was intended by the
eastern tribes solely as a means of teaching their children to be faithful to
the one true sanctuary beyond the Jordan.
7
 [34] The name of this altar was the
Hebrew word for "witness," "ed.